"The one who remained was in his seventies, but tall and bull necked and powerful. He
wore a plain canvas jacket and a checked shirt, like many gyptian men; there was nothing
to mark him out but the air of strength and authority he had. Lyra recognized it: Uncle
Asriel had it, and so did the Master of Jordan. This man's daemon was a crow, very like
the Master's raven.
“That's John Faa, the lord of the western gyptians,” Tony whispered.
John Faa began to speak, in a deep slow voice. “Gyptians! Welcome to the Roping.
We've come to listen and come to decide. You all know why. There are many families
here who've lost a child. Some have lost two. Someone is taking them. To be sure,
landlopers are losing children too. We have no quarrel with landlopers over this.
“Now there's been talk about a child and a reward. Here's the truth to stop all gossip. The
child's name is Lyra Belacqua, and she's being sought by the landloper police. There is a
reward of one thousand sovereigns for giving her up to them. She's a landloper child, and
she's in our care, and there she's going to stay. Anyone tempted by those thousand
sovereigns had better find a place neither on land nor on water. We en't giving her up.”
Lyra felt a blush from the roots of her hair to the soles of her feet; Pantalaimon became a
brown moth to hide. Eyes all around were turning to them, and she could only look up at
Ma Costa for reassurance.
But John Faa was speaking again:
“Talk all we may, we won't change owt. We must act if we want to change things. Here's
another fact for you: the Gobblers, these child thieves, are a taking their prisoners to a
town in the far North, way up in the land of dark. I don't know what they do with 'em
there. Some folk say they kill 'em, other folk say different. We don't know.
“What we do know is that they do it with the help of the landloper police and the clergy.
Every power on land is helping 'em. Remember that. They know what's going on and
they'll help it whenever they can.
“So what I'm proposing en't easy. And I need your agreement. I'm proposing that we
send a band of fighters up north to rescue them kids and bring 'em back alive. I'm
proposing that we put our gold into this, and all the craft and courage we can muster. Yes,
Raymond van Gerrit?”
A man in the audience had raised his hand, and John Faa sat down to let him speak.
“Beg pardon, Lord Faa. There's landloper kids as well as gyptians been taken captive.
Are you saying we should rescue them as well?”
John Faa stood up to answer.
“Raymond, are you saying we should fight our way through every kind of danger to a
little group of frightened children, and then say to some of them that they can come
home, and to the rest that they have to stay? No, you're a better man than that. Well, do I
have your approval, my friends?”
The question caught them by surprise, for there was a moment's hesitation; but then a
full-throated roar filled the hall, and hands were clapped in the air, fists shaken, voices
raised in excited clamor. The rafters of the Zaal shook, and from their perches up in the
dark a score of sleeping birds woke up in fear and flapped their wings, and little showers
of dust drifted down.
John Faa let the noise continue for a minute, and then raised his hand for silence again.
“This'll take a while to organize. I want the heads of the families to raise a tax and
muster a levy. We'll meet again here in three days' time. In between now and then I'm a
going to talk with the child I mentioned before, and with Farder Coram, and form a plan
to put before you when we meet. Goodnight to ye all.”
His massive, plain, blunt presence was enough to calm them. As the audience began to
move out of the great doors into the chilly evening, to go to their boats or to the crowded
bars of the little settlement, Lyra said to Ma Costa:
“Who are the other men on the platform?”
“The heads of the six families, and the other man is Farder Coram.”
It was easy to see who she meant by the other man, because he was the oldest one there.
He walked with a stick, and all the time he'd been sitting behind John Faa he'd been
trembling as if with an ague.
“Come on,” said Tony. “I'd best take you up to pay your respects to John Faa. You call
him Lord Faa. I don't know what you'll be asked, but mind you tell the truth.”
Pantalaimon was a sparrow now, and sat curiously on Lyra's shoulder, his claws deep in
the wolfskin coat, as she followed Tony through the crowd up to the platform.
He lifted her up. Knowing that everyone still in the hall was staring at her, and conscious
of those thousand sovereigns she was suddenly worth, she blushed and hesitated.
Pantalaimon darted to her breast and became a wildcat, sitting up in her arms and hissing
softly as he looked around.
Lyra felt a push, and stepped forward to John Faa. He was stern and massive and
expressionless, more like a pillar of rock than a man, but he stooped and held out his
hand to shake. When she put hers in, it nearly vanished.
“Welcome, Lyra,” he said.
Close to, she felt his voice rumbling like the earth itself. She would have been nervous
but for Pantalaimon, and the fact that John Faa's stony expression had warmed a little. He
was treating her very gently.
“Thank you, Lord Faa,” she said.
“Now you come in the"