"Jem said, “He goes out, all right, when it’s pitch dark. Miss Stephanie Crawford
said she woke up in the middle of the night one time and saw him looking straight
through the window at her… said his head was like a skull lookin‘ at her. Ain’t
you ever waked up at night and heard him, Dill? He walks like this-” Jem slid his
feet through the gravel. “Why do you think Miss Rachel locks up so tight at
night? I’ve seen his tracks in our back yard many a mornin’, and one night I heard
him scratching on the back screen, but he was gone time Atticus got there.”
“Wonder what he looks like?” said Dill.
Jem gave a reasonable description of Boo: Boo was about six-and-a-half feet tall,
judging from his tracks; he dined on raw squirrels and any cats he could catch,
that’s why his hands were bloodstained—if you ate an animal raw, you could
never wash the blood off. There was a long jagged scar that ran across his face;
what teeth he had were yellow and rotten; his eyes popped, and he drooled most
of the time.
“Let’s try to make him come out,” said Dill. “I’d like to see what he looks like.”
Jem said if Dill wanted to get himself killed, all he had to do was go up and knock
on the front door.
Our first raid came to pass only because Dill bet Jem The Gray Ghost against two
Tom Swifts that Jem wouldn’t get any farther than the Radley gate. In all his life,
Jem had never declined a dare.
Jem thought about it for three days. I suppose he loved honor more than his head,
for Dill wore him down easily: “You’re scared,” Dill said, the first day. “Ain’t
scared, just respectful,” Jem said. The next day Dill said, “You’re too scared even
to put your big toe in the front yard.” Jem said he reckoned he wasn’t, he’d passed
the Radley Place every school day of his life.
“Always runnin‘,” I said.
But Dill got him the third day, when he told Jem that folks in Meridian certainly
weren’t as afraid as the folks in Maycomb, that he’d never seen such scary folks
as the ones in Maycomb.
This was enough to make Jem march to the corner, where he stopped and leaned
against the light-pole, watching the gate hanging crazily on its homemade hinge.

“I hope you’ve got it through your head that he’ll kill us each and every one, Dill
Harris,” said Jem, when we joined him. “Don’t blame me when he gouges your
eyes out. You started it, remember.”
“You’re still scared,” murmured Dill patiently.
Jem wanted Dill to know once and for all that he wasn’t scared of anything: “It’s
just that I can’t think of a way to make him come out without him gettin‘ us.”
Besides, Jem had his little sister to think of.
When he said that, I knew he was afraid. Jem had his little sister to think of the
time I dared him to jump off the top of the house: “If I got killed, what’d become
of you?” he asked. Then he jumped, landed unhurt, and his sense of responsibility
left him until confronted by the Radley Place.
“You gonna run out on a dare?” asked Dill. “If you are, then-”
“Dill, you have to think about these things,” Jem said. “Lemme think a minute…
it’s sort of like making a turtle come out…”
“How’s that?” asked Dill.
“Strike a match under him.”
I told Jem if he set fire to the Radley house I was going to tell Atticus on him.
Dill said striking a match under a turtle was hateful.
“Ain’t hateful, just persuades him—‘s not like you’d chunk him in the fire,” Jem
growled.
“How do you know a match don’t hurt him?”
“Turtles can’t feel, stupid,” said Jem.
“Were you ever a turtle, huh?”
“My stars, Dill! Now lemme think… reckon we can rock him…”
Jem stood in thought so long that Dill made a mild concession: “I won’t say you
ran out on a dare an‘ I’ll swap you The Gray Ghost if you just go up and touch the
house.”
Jem brightened. “Touch the house, that all?”
Dill nodded.
“Sure that’s all, now? I don’t want you hollerin‘ something different the minute I

get back.”
“Yeah, that’s all,” said Dill. “He’ll probably come out after you when he sees you
in the yard, then Scout’n‘ me’ll jump on him and hold him down till we can tell
him we ain’t gonna hurt him.”
We left the corner, crossed the side street that ran in front of the Radley house,
and stopped at the gate.
“Well go on,” said Dill, “Scout and me’s right behind you.”
“I’m going,” said Jem, “don’t hurry me.”
He walked to the corner of the lot, then back again, studying the simple terrain as
if deciding how best to effect an entry, frowning and scratching his head.
Then I sneered at him.
Jem threw open the gate and sped to the side of the house, slapped it with his
palm and ran back past us, not waiting to see if his foray was successful. Dill and
I followed on his heels. Safely on our porch, panting and out of breath, we looked
back.
The old house was the same, droopy and sick, but as we stared down the street we
thought we saw an inside shutter move. Flick. A tiny, almost invisible movement,
and the house was still.
Contents - Prev / Next
Chapter 2
Dill left us early in September, to return to Meridian. We saw him off on the five
o’clock bus and I was miserable without him until it occurred to me that I would
be starting to school in a week. I never looked forward more to anything in my
life. Hours of wintertime had found me in the treehouse, looking over at the
schoolyard, spying on multitudes of children through a two-power telescope Jem
had given me, learning their games, following Jem’s red jacket through wriggling

circles of blind man’s buff, secretly sharing their misfortunes and minor victories.
I longed to join them.
Jem condescended to take me to school the first day, a job usually done by one’s
parents, but Atticus had said Jem would be delighted to show me where my room
was. I think some money changed hands in this transaction, for as we trotted
around the corner past the Radley Place I heard an unfamiliar jingle in Jem’s
pockets. When we slowed to a walk at the edge of the schoolyard, Jem was
careful to explain that during school hours I was not to bother him, I was not to
approach him with requests to enact a chapter of Tarzan and the Ant Men, to
embarrass him with references to his private life, or tag along behind him at
recess and noon. I was to stick with the first grade and he would stick with the
fifth. In short, I was to leave him alone.
“You mean we can’t play any more?” I asked.
“We’ll do like we always do at home,” he said, “but you’ll see—school’s
different.”
It certainly was. Before the first morning was over, Miss Caroline Fisher, our
teacher, hauled me up to the front of the room and patted the palm of my hand
with a ruler, then made me stand in the corner until noon.
Miss Caroline was no more than twenty-one. She had bright auburn hair, pink
cheeks, and wore crimson fingernail polish. She also wore high-heeled pumps and
a red-and-white-striped dress. She looked and smelled like a peppermint drop.
She boarded across the street one door down from us in Miss Maudie Atkinson’s
upstairs front room, and when Miss Maudie introduced us to her, Jem was in a
haze for days.
Miss Caroline printed her name on the blackboard and said, “This says I am Miss
Caroline Fisher. I am from North Alabama, from Winston County.” The class
murmured apprehensively, should she prove to harbor her share of the
peculiarities indigenous to that region. (When Alabama seceded from the Union
on January 11, 1861, Winston County seceded from Alabama, and every child in
Maycomb County knew it.) North Alabama was full of Liquor Interests, Big
Mules, steel companies, Republicans, professors, and other persons of no
background.

Miss Caroline began the day by reading us a story about cats. The cats had long
conversations with one another, they wore cunning little clothes and lived in a
warm house beneath a kitchen stove. By the time Mrs. Cat called the drugstore for
an order of chocolate malted mice the class was wriggling like a bucketful of
catawba worms. Miss Caroline seemed unaware that the ragged, denim-shirted
and floursack-skirted first grade, most of whom had chopped cotton and fed hogs
from the time they were able to walk, were immune to imaginative literature.
Miss Caroline"