We are at rest five miles behind the front.
Yesterday we were relieved, and now our bellies
are full of beef and haricot beans. We are
satisfied and at peace. Each man has another
mess-tin full for the evening; and, what is more,
there is a double ration of sausage and bread.
That puts a man in fine trim. We have not had
such luck as this for a long time. The cook with
his carroty head is begging us to eat; he beckons
with his ladle to every one that passes, and
spoons him out a great dollop. He does not see
how he can empty his stew-pot in time for coffee.
Tjaden and Müller have produced two
washbasins and had them filled up to the brim
as a reserve. In Tjaden this is voracity, in Müller
it is foresight. Where Tjaden puts it all is a
mystery, for he is and always will be as thin as a
rake. What's more important still is the issue of
a double ration of smokes. Ten cigars, twenty
cigarettes, and two quids of chew per man; now
that is decent. I have exchanged my chewing
tobacco with Katczinsky for his cigarettes, which
9Erich Maria Remarque
means I have forty altogether. That's enough for
a day.
It is true we have no right to this windfall. The
Prussian is not so generous. We have only a
miscalculation to thank for it.
Fourteen days ago we had to go up and relieve
the front line. It was fairly quiet on our sector, so
the quartermaster who remained in the rear had
requisitioned the usual quantity of rations and
provided for the full company of one hundred
and fifty men. But on the last day an
astonishing number of English heavies opened
up on us with high-explosive, drumming
ceaselessly on our position, so that we suffered
severely and came back only eighty strong.
Last night we moved back and settled down to
get a good sleep for once: Katczinsky is right
when he says it would not be such a bad war if
only one could get a little more sleep. In the line
we have had next to none, and fourteen days is
a long time at one stretch.
It was noon before the first of us crawled out of
our quarters. Half an hour later every man had
his mess-tin and we gathered at the cookhouse,
which smelt greasy and nourishing. At the head
of the queue of course were the hungriest--little
Albert Kropp, the clearest thinker among us and
therefore only a lance-corporal; Müller, who still
carries his school textbooks with him, dreams of
examinations, and during a bombardment
mutters propositions in physics; Leer, who
10ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
wears a full beard and has a preference for the
girls from officers' brothels. He swears that they
are obliged by an army order to wear silk
chemises and to bathe before entertaining
guests of the rank of captain and upwards. And
as the fourth, myself, Paul BAumer. And four
are nineteen years of age, and all four joined up
from the same class as volunteers for the war.
Close behind us were our friends: Tjaden, a
skinny locksmith of our own age, the biggest
eater of the company. He sits down to eat as thin
as a grasshopper and gets up as big as a bug in
the family way; Haie Westhus, of the same age, a
peat-digger, who can easily hold a ration-loaf in
his hand and say: Guess what I've got in my fist;
then Detering, a peasant, who thinks of nothing
but
his farm-yard and his wife; and finally
Stanislaus Katczinsky, the leader of our group,
shrewd, cunning, and hard-bitten, forty years of
age, with a face of the soil, blue eyes, bent
shoulders, and a remarkable nose for dirty
weather, good food, and soft jobs.
Our gang formed the head of the queue before
the cook-house. We were growing impatient, for
the cook paid no attention to us.
Finally Katczinsky called to him: "Say, Heinrich,
open up the soup-kitchen. Anyone can see the
beans are done."
He shook his head sleepily: "You must all be
there first." Tjaden grinned: "We are all here."
11Erich Maria Remarque
The sergeant-cook still took no notice. "That may
do for you," he said. "But where are the others?"
"They won't be fed by you to-day. They're either
in the dressing-station or pushing up daisies."
The cook was quite disconcerted as the facts
dawned on him. He was staggered. "And I have
cooked for one hundred and fifty men--
"
Kropp poked him in the ribs. "Then for once we'll
have enough. Come on, begin!"
Suddenly a vision came over Tjaden. His sharp,
mousy features began to shine, his eyes grew
small with cunning, his jaws twitched, and he
whispered hoarsely: "Man! then you've got bread
for one hundred and fifty men too, eh?"
The sergeant-cook nodded absent-minded, and
bewildered.
Tjaden seized him by the tunic. "And sausage?"
Ginger nodded again.
Tjaden's chaps quivered. "Tobacco too?"
"Yes, everything."
Tjaden beamed: "What a bean-feast! That's all
for us! Each man gets--wait a bit--yes,
practically two issues."
Then Ginger stirred himself and said: "That
won't do."
We got excited and began to crowd around.
"Why won't that do, you old carrot?" demanded
Katczinsky.
12ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
"Eighty men can't have what is meant for a
hundred and fifty."
"We'll soon show you," growled Müller.
"I don't care about the stew, but I can only
issue rations for eighty men," persisted Ginger.
Katczinsky got angry. "You might be generous
for once. You haven't drawn food for eighty men.
You've drawn it for the Second Company. Good.
Let's have it then. We are the Second Company."
We began to jostle the fellow. No one felt kindly
toward him, for it was his fault that the food
often came up to us in the line too late and cold.
Under shellfire he wouldn't bring his kitchen up
near enough, so that our soup-carriers had to go
much farther than those of the other companies.
Now Bulcke of the First Company is a much
better fellow. He is as fat as a hamster in winter,
but he trundles his pots when it comes to that
right up to the very front-line.
We were in just the right mood, and there would
certainly have been a dust-up if our company
commander had not appeared. He informed
himself of the dispute, and only remarked: "Yes,
we did have heavy losses yesterday."
He glanced into the dixie. "The beans look
good." Ginger nodded. "Cooked with meat and
fat." The lieutenant looked at us. He knew what
we were thinking. And he knew many other
things too, because he came to the company as
a non-com, and was promoted from the ranks.
He lifted the lid from the dixie again and sniffed.
13Erich Maria Remarque
Then passing on he said: "Bring me a plate full.
Serve out all the rations. We can do with them."
Ginger looked sheepish as Tjaden danced round
him.
"It doesn't cost you anything! Anyone would
think the quartermaster's store belonged to him!
And now get on with it, you old blubber-sticker,
and don't you miscount either."
"You be hanged!" spat out Ginger. When things
get beyond him he throws up the sponge
altogether; he just goes to pieces. And as if to
show that all things were equal to him, of his
own free will he issued in addition half a pound
of synthetic honey to each man.
To-day is wonderfully good. The mail has come,
and almost every man has a few letters and
papers. We stroll over to the meadow behind the
billets. Kropp has the round lid of a margarine
tub under his arm.
On the right side of the meadow a large common
latrine has been built, a roofed and durable
construction. But that is for recruits who as yet
have not learned how to make the most of
whatever comes their way. We want something
better. Scattered about everywhere there are
separate, individual boxes for the same purpose.
They are square, neat boxes with wooden sides
all round, and have unimpeachably satisfactory
seats. On the sides are hand grips enabling one
to shift them about.
14ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
We move three together in a ring and sit down
comfortably. And it will be two hours before we
get up again.
I well remembered how embarrassed we were as
recruits in barracks when we had to use the
general latrine. There were no doors and twenty
men sat side by side as in a railway carriage, so
that they could be reviewed all at one glance, for
soldiers must always be under supervision.
Since then we have learned better than to be shy
about such trifling immodesties. In time things
far worse than that came easy to us.
Here in the open air though, the business is
entirely a pleasure. I no longer understand why
we should always have shied at these things
before. They are, in fact, just as natural as
eating and drinking. We might perhaps have
paid no particular attention to them had they
not figured so large in our experience, nor been
such novelties to our minds--to the old hands
they had long been a mere matter of course.
The soldier is on friendlier terms than other men
with his stomach and intestines. Three- quarters
of his vocabulary is derived from these regions,
and they give an intimate flavour to expressions
of his greatest joy as well as of his deepest
indignation. It is impossible to express oneself in
any other way so clearly and pithily. Our
families and our teachers will be shocked when
we go home, but here it is the universal
language.
15Erich Maria Remarque
Enforced publicity has in our eyes restored the
character of complete innocence to all these
things. More than that, they are so much a
matter of course that their comfortable
performance is fully as much enjoyed as the
playing of a safe top running flush. Not for
nothing was the word "latrine-rumour" invented;
these places are the regimental gossip-shops
and common-rooms.
We feel ourselves for the time being better off
than in any palatial white-tiled "convenience."
There it can only be hygienic; here it is beautiful.
These are wonderfully care-free hours. Over us
is the blue sky. On the horizon float the bright
yellow, sunlit observation-balloons, and the
many little white clouds of the anti-aircraft
shells. Often they rise in a sheaf as they follow
after an airman. We hear the muffled rumble of
the front only as very distant thunder, bumble-
bees droning by quite drown it. Around us
stretches the flowery meadow. The grasses sway
their tall spears; the white butterflies flutter
around and float on the soft warm wind of the
late summer. We read letters and newspapers
and smoke. We take off our caps and lay them
down beside us. The wind plays with our hair; it
plays with our words and thoughts. The three
boxes stand in the midst of the glowing, red
field-poppies.
We set the lid of the margarine tub on our knees
and so have a good table for a game of skat.
16ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Kropp has the cards with him. After every
misÃ¨re ouverte we have a round of nap. One
could sit like this for ever.
The notes of an accordion float across from the
billets. Often we lay aside the cards and look
about us. One of us will say: "Well, boys...." Or
"It was a near thing that time...." And for a
moment we fall silent. There is in each of us a
feeling of constraint. We are all sensible of it; it
needs no words to communicate it. It might
easily have happened that we should not be
sitting
here on our boxes to-day; it came damn near to
that. And so everything is new and brave, red
poppies and good food, cigarettes and summer
breeze.
Kropp asks: "Anyone seen Kemmerich lately?"
"He's up at St. Joseph's," I tell him.
Müller explains that he has a flesh wound in his
thigh; a good blighty.
We decide to go and see him this afternoon.
Kropp pulls out a letter. "Kantorek sends you all
his best wishes."
We laugh. Müller throws his cigarette away and
says: "I wish he was here."
Kantorek had been our schoolmaster, a stern
little man in a grey tailcoat, with a face like a
shrew mouse. He was about the same size as
Corporal Himmelstoss, the "terror of
17Erich Maria Remarque
Klosterberg." It is very queer that the
unhappiness of the world is so often brought on
by small men. They are so much more energetic
and uncompromising than the big fellows. I have
always taken good care to keep out of sections
with small company commanders. They are
mostly confounded little martinets.
During drill-time Kantorek gave us long lectures
until the whole of our class went, under his
shepherding, to the District Commandant and
volunteered. I can see him now, as he used to
glare at us through his spectacles and say in a
moving voice: "Won't you join up, Comrades?"
These teachers always carry their feelings ready
in their waistcoat pockets, and trot them out by
the hour. But we didn't think of that then.
There was, indeed, one of us who hesitated and
did not want to fall into line. That was Joseph
Behm, a plump, homely fellow. But he did allow
himself to be persuaded, otherwise he would
have been ostracised. And perhaps more of us
thought as he did, but no one could very well
stand out, because at that time even one's
parents were ready with the word "coward"; no
one had the vaguest idea what we were in for.
The wisest were just the poor and simple people.
They knew the war to be a misfortune, whereas
those who were better off, and should have been
able to see more clearly what the consequences
would be, were beside themselves with joy.
18ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Katczinsky said that was a result of their
upbringing. It made them stupid. And what Kat
said, he had thought about.
Strange to say, Behm was one of the first to fall.
He got hit in the eye during an attack, and we
left him lying for dead. We couldn't bring him
with us, because we had to come back helter-
skelter. In the afternoon suddenly we heard him
call, and saw him crawling about in No Man's
Land. He had only been knocked unconscious.
Because he could not see, and was mad with
pain, he failed to keep under cover, and so was
shot down before anyone could go and fetch him
in.
Naturally we couldn't blame Kantorek for this.
Where would the world be if one brought every
man to book? There were thousands of
Kantoreks, all of whom were convinced that they
were acting for the best--in a way that cost them
nothing.
And that is why they let us down so badly.
For us lads of eighteen they ought to have been
mediators and guides to the world of maturity,
the world of work, of duty, of culture, of
progress--to the future. We often made fun of
them and played jokes on them, but in our
hearts we trusted them. The idea of authority,
which they represented, was associated in our
minds with a greater insight and a more
humane wisdom. But the first death we saw
shattered this belief. We had to recognise that
19Erich Maria Remarque
our generation was more to be trusted than
theirs.
They surpassed us only in phrases and in
cleverness. The first bombardment showed us
our mistake, and under it the world as they had
taught it to us broke in pieces.
While they continued to write and talk, we saw
the wounded and dying. While they taught that
duty to one's country is the greatest thing, we
already knew that death-throes are stronger.
But for all that we were no mutineers, no
deserters, no cowards--they were very free with
all these expressions. We loved our country as
much as they; we went courageously into every
action; but also we distinguished the false from
true, we had suddenly learned to see. And we
saw that there was nothing of their world left.
We were all at once terribly alone; and alone we
must see it through.
Before going over to see Kemmerich we pack up
his things: he will need them on the way back.
In the dressing station there is great activity: it
reeks as ever of carbolic, pus, and sweat. We are
accustomed to a good deal in the billets, but this
makes us feel faint. We ask for Kemmerich. He
lies in a large room and receives us with feeble
expressions of joy and helpless agitation. While
he
was unconscious someone had stolen his watch.
20ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Müller shakes his head: "I always told you that
nobody should carry as good a watch as that."
Müller is rather crude and tactless, otherwise he
would hold his tongue, for anybody can see that
Kemmerich will never come out of this place
again. Whether he finds his watch or not will
make no difference, at the most one will only be
able to send it to his people.
"How goes it, Franz?" asks Kropp.
Kemmerich's head sinks.
"Not so bad... but I have such a damned pain in
my foot."
We look at his bed covering. His leg lies under a
wire basket. The bed covering arches over it. I
kick Müller on the shin, for he is just about to
tell Kemmerich what the orderlies told us
outside: that Kemmerich has lost his foot. The
leg is amputated. He looks ghastly, yellow and
wan. In his face there are already the strained
lines that we know so well, we have seen them
now hundreds of times. They are not so much
lines as marks. Under the skin the life no longer
pulses, it has already pressed out the
boundaries of the body. Death is working
through from within. It already has command in
the eyes. Here lies our comrade, Kemmerich,
who a little while ago was roasting horse flesh
with us and squatting in the shell-holes. He it is
still and yet it is not he any longer. His features
have become uncertain and faint, like a
21Erich Maria Remarque
photographic plate from which two pictures have
been taken. Even his voice sounds like ashes.
I think of the time when we went away. His
mother, a good plump matron, brought him to
the station. She wept continually, her face was
bloated and swollen. Kemmerich felt
embarrassed, for she was the least composed of
all; she simply dissolved into fat and water. Then
she caught sight of me and took hold of my arm
again and again, and implored me to look after
Franz out there. Indeed he did have a face like a
child, and such frail bones that after four weeks'
pack-carrying he already had flat feet. But how
can a man look after anyone in the field!
"Now you will soon be going home," says Kropp.
"You would have had to wait at least three or
four months for your leave."
Kemmerich nods. I cannot bear to look at his
hands, they are like wax. Under the nails is the
dirt of the trenches, it shows through blue-black
like poison. It strikes me that these nails will
continue to grow like lean fantastic cellar-plants
long after Kemmerich breathes no more. I see
the picture before me. They twist themselves
into corkscrews and grow and grow, and with
them the hair on the decaying skull, just like
grass in a good soil, just like grass, how can it
be possible-- Müller leans over. "We have
brought your things, Franz."
Kemmerich signs with his hands. "Put them
under the bed."
22ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Müller does so. Kemmerich starts on again
about the watch. How can one calm him without
making him suspicious?
Müller reappears with a pair of airman's boots.
They are fine English boots of soft, yellow leather
which reach to the knees and lace up all the
way--they are things to be coveted.
Müller is delighted at the sight of them. He
matches their soles against his own clumsy
boots and says: "Will you be taking them with
you then, Franz?"
We all three have the same thought; even if he
should get better, he would be able to use only
one--they are no use to him. But as things are
now it is a pity that they should stay here; the
orderlies will of course grab them as soon as he
is dead, "Won't you leave them with us?" Müller
repeats.
Kemmerich doesn't want to. They are his most
prized possessions.
"Well, we could exchange," suggests Müller
again. "Out here one can make some use of
them." Still Kemmerich is not to be moved.
I tread on Müller's foot; reluctantly he puts the
fine boots back again under the bed.
We talk a little more and then take our leave.
"Cheerio, Franz."
23Erich Maria Remarque
I promise him to come back in the morning.
Müller talks of doing so, too. He is thinking of
the lace-up boots and means to be on the spot.
Kemmerich groans. He is feverish. We get hold of
an orderly outside and ask him to give
Kemmerich a dose of morphia.
He refuses. "If we were to give morphia to
everyone we would have to have tubs full--
"
"You only attend to officers properly," says Kropp
viciously.
I hastily intervene and give him a cigarette. He
takes it.
"Are you usually allowed to give it, then?" I ask
him.
He is annoyed. "If you don't think so, then why
do you ask?"
I press a few more cigarettes into his hand. "Do
us the favour--
"
"Well, all right," he says.
Kropp goes in with him. He doesn't trust him
and wants to see. We wait outside.
Müller returns to the subject of the boots. "They
would fit me perfectly. In these boots I get blister
after blister. Do you think he will last till
tomorrow after drill? If he passes out in the
night, we know where the boots--
"
Kropp returns. "Do you think--?" he asks.
"Done for," says Müller emphatically.
24ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
We go back to the huts. I think of the letter that
I must write tomorrow to Kemmerich's mother. I
am freezing. I could do with a tot of rum. Müller
pulls up some grass and chews it. Suddenly
little Kropp throws his cigarette away, stamps on
it savagely, and looking around him with a
broken and distracted face, stammers "Damned
shit, the damned shit!"
We walk on for a long time. Kropp has calmed
himself; we understand, he saw red; out here
every man gets like that sometime.
"What has Kantorek written to you?" Müller asks
him.
He laughs. "We are the Iron Youth."
We all three smile bitterly. Kropp rails: he is glad
that he can speak.
Yes, that's the way they think, these hundred
thousand Kantoreks! Iron Youth. Youth! We are
none of us more than twenty years old. But
young? Youth? That is long ago. We are old folk.
25Erich Maria Remarque
TWO
It is strange to think that at home in the drawer
of my writing table there lies the beginning of a
play called "Saul" and a bundle of poems. Many
an evening I have worked over them--we all did
something of the kind--but that has become so
unreal to me I cannot comprehend it any more.
Our early life is cut off from the moment we
came here, and that without our lifting a hand.
We often try to look back on it and to find an
explanation, but never quite succeed. For us
young men of twenty everything is
extraordinarily vague, for Kropp, Müller, Leer,
and for me, for all of us whom Kantorek calls the
"Iron Youth." All the older men are linked up
with their previous life. They have wives,
children, occupations, and interests, they have a
background which is so strong that the war
cannot obliterate it. We young men of twenty,
however, have only our parents, and some,
perhaps, a girl--that is not much, for at our age
the influence of parents is at its weakest and
girls have not yet got a hold over us. Besides this
26ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
there was little else--some enthusiasm, a few
hobbies, and our school. Beyond this our life did
not extend. And of this nothing remains.
Kantorek would say that we stood on the
threshold of life. And so it would seem. We had
as yet taken no root. The war swept us away.
For the others, the older men, it is but an
interruption. They are able to think beyond it.
We, however, have been gripped by it and do not
know what the end may be. We know only that
in some strange and melancholy way we have
become a waste land. All the same, we are not
often sad.
Though Müller would be delighted to have
Kemmerich's boots, he is really quite as
sympathetic as another who could not bear to
think of such a thing for grief. He merely sees
things clearly. Were Kemmerich able to make
any use of the boots, then Müller would rather
go bare-foot over barbed wire than scheme how
to get hold of them. But as it is the boots are
quite inappropriate to Kemmerich's
circumstances, whereas Müller can make good
use of them. Kemmerich will die; it is immaterial
who gets them. Why, then, should Müller not
succeed to them? He has more right than a
hospital orderly. When Kemmerich is dead it will
be too late. Therefore Müller is already on the
watch.
We have lost all sense of other considerations,
because they are artificial. Only the facts are
27Erich Maria Remarque
real and important for us. And good boots are
scarce.
Once it was different. When we went to the
district-commandant to enlist, we were a class of
twenty young men, many of whom proudly
shaved for the first time before going to the
barracks. We had no definite plans for our
future. Our thoughts of a career and occupation
were as yet of too unpractical a character to
furnish any scheme of life. We were still
crammed full of vague ideas which gave to life,
and to the war also an ideal and almost
romantic character. We were
trained in the army for ten weeks and in this
time more profoundly influenced than by ten
years at school. We learned that a bright button
is weightier than four volumes of Schopenhauer.
At first astonished, then embittered, and finally
indifferent, we recognised that what matters is
not the mind but the boot brush, not intelligence
but the system, not freedom but drill. We
became soldiers with eagerness and enthusiasm,
but they have done everything to knock that out
of us. After three weeks it was no longer
incomprehensible to us that a braided postman
should have more authority over us than had
formerly our parents, our teachers, and the
whole gamut of culture from Plato to Goethe.
With our young, awakened eyes we saw that the
classical conception of the Fatherland held by
our teachers resolved itself here into a
renunciation of personality such as one would
28ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
not ask of the meanest servants--salutes,
springing to attention, parade-marches,
presenting arms, right wheel, left wheel, clicking
the heels, insults, and a thousand pettifogging
details. We had fancied our task would be
different, only to find we were to be trained for
heroism as though we were circus-ponies. But
we soon accustomed ourselves to it. We learned
in fact that some of these things were necessary,
but the rest merely show. Soldiers have a fine
nose for such distinctions.
By threes and fours our class was scattered over
the platoons amongst Frisian fishermen,
peasants, and labourers with whom we soon
made friends. Kropp, Müller, Kemmerich, and I
went to No .9 platoon under Corporal
Himmelstoss.
He had the reputation of being the strictest
disciplinarian in the camp, and was proud of it.
He was a small undersized fellow with a foxy,
waxed moustache, who had seen twelve years'
service and was in civil life a postman. He had a
special dislike of Kropp, Tjaden, Westhus, and
me, because he sensed a quiet defiance.
I have remade his bed fourteen times in one
morning. Each time he had some fault to find
and pulled it to pieces. I have kneaded a pair of
prehistoric boots that were as hard as iron for
twenty hours--with intervals of course--until
they became as soft as butter and not even
Himmelstoss could find anything more to do to
29Erich Maria Remarque
them; under his orders I have scrubbed out the
Corporals' Mess with a tooth-brush. Kropp and I
were given the job of clearing the barrack-square
of snow with a hand-broom and a dust-pan, and
we would have gone on till we were frozen had
not a lieutenant accidentally appeared who sent
us off, and hauled Himmelstoss over the coals.
But the only result of this was to make
Himmelstoss hate us more. For six weeks
consecutively I did guard every Sunday and was
hut-orderly for the same length of time. With full
pack and rifle I have had to practise on a wet,
soft, newly-ploughed field the "Prepare to
advance, advance!" and the "Lie down!" until I
was one lump of mud and finally collapsed. Four
hours later I had to report to Himmelstoss with
my clothes scrubbed clean, my hands chafed
and bleeding. Together with Kropp, Westhus,
and Tjaden I have stood at attention in a hard
frost without gloves for a quarter of an hour at a
stretch, while Himmelstoss watched for the
slightest movement of our bare fingers on the
steel barrel of the rifle. I have run eight times
from the top floor of the barracks down to the
courtyard in my shirt at two o'clock in the
morning because my drawers projected three
inches beyond the edge of the stool on which one
had to stack all one's things. Alongside me ran
the corporal, Himmelstoss, and trod on my bare
toes. At bayonet-practice I had constantly to
fight with Himmelstoss, I with a heavy iron
weapon, whilst he had a handy wooden one with
which he easily struck my arms till they were
30ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
black and blue. Once, indeed, I became so
infuriated that I ran at him blindly and gave him
a mighty jab in the stomach and knocked him
down. When he reported me the company
commander laughed at him and told him he
ought to keep his eyes open; he understood
Himmelstoss, and apparently was not displeased
at his discomfiture. I became a past master on
the parallel bars and excelled at physical jerks;--
we have trembled at the mere sound of his voice,
but this runaway post-horse never got the better
of us.
One Sunday as Kropp and I were lugging a
latrine-bucket on a pole across the barrack-
yard, Himmelstoss came by, all polished up and
spry for going out. He planted himself in front of
us and asked how we liked the job. In spite of
ourselves we tripped and emptied the bucket
over his legs. He raved, but the limit had been
reached.
"That means clink," he yelled.
But Kropp had had enough. "There'll be an
enquiry first," he said, "and then we'll unload."
"Mind how you speak to a non-commissioned
officer!" bawled Himmelstoss. "Have you lost
your senses? You wait till you're spoken to.
What will you do, anyway?"
"Show you up, Corporal," said Kropp, his
thumbs in line with the seams of his trousers.
31Erich Maria Remarque
Himmelstoss saw that we meant it and went off
without saying a word. But before he
disappeared he growled: "You'll drink this!"--but
that was the end of his authority. He tried it on
once more in the ploughed field with his
"Prepare to advance, advance" and "Lie down."
We obeyed each order, since an order's an order
and has to be obeyed. But we did it so slowly
that Himmelstoss became desperate. Carefully
we went down on our knees, then on our hands,
and so on; in the meantime, quite infuriated, he
had given another command.
But before we had even begun to sweat he was
hoarse. After that he left us in peace. He did
indeed always refer to us as swine, but there
was, nevertheless, a certain respect in his tone.
There were many other staff corporals, the
majority of whom were more decent. But above
all each of them wanted to keep his good job
there as long as possible, and this he could do
only by being strict with the recruits.
So we were put through every conceivable
refinement of parade-ground soldiering till we
often howled with rage. Many of us became ill
through it; Wolf actually died of inflammation of
the lung. But we would have felt ridiculous had
we hauled down our colours. We became hard,
suspicious, pitiless, vicious, tough--and that was
good; for these attributes were just what we
lacked. Had we gone into the trenches without
this period of training most of us would certainly
32ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
have gone mad. Only thus were we prepared for
what awaited us. We did not break down, but
adapted ourselves; our twenty years, which
made many another thing so grievous, helped us
in
this. But by far the most important result was
that it awakened in us a strong, practical sense
of esprit de corps, which in the field developed
into the finest thing that arose out of the war--
comradeship.
I sit by Kemmerich's bed. He is sinking steadily.
Around us is a great commotion. A hospital tram
has arrived and the wounded fit to be moved are
being selected. The doctor passes by
Kemmerich's bed without once looking at him.
"Next time, Franz," I say.
He raises himself on the pillow with his elbows.
"They have amputated my leg."
He knows it too then. I nod and answer: "You
must be thankful you've come off with that."
He is silent.
I resume: "It might have been both legs, Franz.
Wegeler has lost his right arm. That's much
worse. Besides, you will be going home." He
looks at me. "Do you think so?"
"Of course."
"Do you think so?" he repeats.
33Erich Maria Remarque
"Sure, Franz. Once you've got over the
operation."
He beckons me to bend down. I stoop over bin
and he whispers: "I don't think so."
"Don't talk rubbish; Franz, in a couple of days
you'll see for yourself. What is it anyway--an
amputated leg? here they patch up far worse
things than that."
He lifts one hand. "Look here though, these
fingers."
"That's the result of the operation. Just eat
decently and you'll soon be well again. Do they
look after you properly?"
He points to a dish that is still half full. I get
excited. "Franz, you must eat. Eating is the main
thing. That looks good too."
He turns away. After a pause he says slowly: "I
wanted to become a head-forester once."
"So you may still," I assure him. "There are
splendid artificial limbs now, you'd hardly know
there was anything missing. They are fixed on to
the muscles. You can move the fingers and work
and even write with an artificial hand. And
besides, they will always be making new
improvements."
For a while he lies still. Then he says: "You can
take my lace-up boots with you for Müller."
I nod and wonder what to say to encourage him.
His lips have fallen away, his mouth has become
34ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
larger, his teeth stick out and look as though
they were made of chalk. The flesh melts, the
forehead bulges more prominently, the
cheekbones protrude. The skeleton is working
itself through. The eyes are already sunken in.
In a couple of hours it will be over.
He is not the first that I have seen thus; but we
grew up together and that always makes it a bit
different. I have copied his essays. At school he
used to wear a brown coat with a belt and shiny
sleeves. He was the only one of us, too, who
could do the giant's turn on the horizontal bar.
His hair flew in his face like silk when he did it.
Kantorek was proud of him. But he couldn't
stand cigarettes. His skin was very white; he had
something of the girl about him.
I glance at my boots. They are big and clumsy,
the breeches are tucked into them, and standing
up one looks well-built and powerful in these
great drainpipes. But when we go bathing and
strip, suddenly we have slender legs again and
slight shoulders. We are no longer soldiers but
little more than boys; no one would believe that
we could carry packs. It is a strange moment
when we stand naked; then we become civilians,
and almost feel ourselves to be so. When bathing
Franz Kemmerich looked as slight and frail as a
child. There he lies now--but why? The whole
world ought to pass by this bed and say: "That is
Franz Kemmerich, nineteen and a half years old,
he doesn't want to die. Let him not die!"
35Erich Maria Remarque
My thoughts become confused. This atmosphere
of carbolic and gangrene clogs the lungs, it is a
thick gruel, it suffocates.
It grows dark. Kemmerich's face changes colour,
it lifts from the pillow and is so pale that it
gleams. The mouth moves slightly. I draw near
to him. He whispers: "If you find my watch, send
it home--
"
I do not reply. It is no use any more. No one can
console him. I am wretched with helplessness.
This forehead with its hollow temples, this
mouth that now seems all teeth, this sharp nose!
And the fat, weeping woman at home to whom I
must write. If only the letter were sent off
already!
Hospital-orderlies go to and fro with bottles and
pails. One of them comes up, casts a glance at
Kemmerich and goes away again. You can see he
is waiting, apparently he wants the bed.
I bend over Franz and talk to him as though that
could save him: "Perhaps you will go to the
convalescent home at Klosterberg, among the
villas, Franz. Then you can look out from the
window across the fields to the two trees on the
horizon. It is the loveliest time of the year now,
when the corn ripens; at evening the fields in the
sunlight look like mother-of-pearl. And the lane
of poplars by the Klosterbach, where we used to
catch sticklebacks! You can build an aquarium
again and keep fish in it, and you can go without
36ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
asking anyone, you can even play the piano if
you want to."
I lean down over his face which lies in the
shadow. He still breathes, lightly. His face is wet,
he is crying. What a fine mess I have made of it
with my foolish talk!
"But Franz"--I put my arm round his shoulder
and put my face against his. "Will you sleep
now?"
He does not answer. The tears run down his
cheeks. I would like to wipe them away but my
handkerchief is too dirty.
An hour passes. I sit tensely and watch his every
movement in case he may perhaps say
something. What if he were to open his mouth
and cry out! But he only weeps, his head turned
aside. He does not speak of his mother or his
brothers and sisters. He says nothing; all that
lies behind him; he is entirely alone now with his
little life of nineteen years, and cries because it
leaves him. This is the most disturbing and
hardest parting that I ever have seen, although it
was pretty bad too with Tiedjen, who called for
his mother--a big bear of a fellow who, with wild
eyes full of terror, held off the doctor from his
bed with a dagger until he collapsed.
Suddenly Kemmerich groans and begins to
gurgle.
I jump up, stumble outside and demand: "Where
is the doctor? Where is the doctor?"
37Erich Maria Remarque
As I catch sight of the white apron I seize hold of
it: "Come quick, Franz Kemmerich is dying."
He frees himself and asks an orderly standing
by: "Which will that be?"
He says: "Bed 26, amputated thigh."
He sniffs: "How should I know anything about it,
I've amputated five legs to-day"; he shoves me
away, says to the hospital-orderly "You see to it,"
and hurries off to the operating room.
I tremble with rage as I go along with the
orderly. The man looks at me and says: "One
operation after another since five o'clock this
morning. You know, to-day alone there have
been sixteen deaths--yours is the seventeenth.
There will probably be twenty altogether--
"
I become faint, all at once I cannot do any more.
I won't revile any more, it is senseless, I could
drop down and never rise up again.
We are by Kemmerich's bed. He is dead. The face
is still wet from the tears. The eyes are half open
and yellow like old horn buttons. The orderly
pokes me in the ribs, "Are you taking his things
with you?" I nod.
He goes on: "We must take him away at once, we
want the bed.
Outside they are lying on the floor."
I collect Kemmerich's things, and untie his
identification disc. The orderly asks about the
pay- book. I say that it is probably in the
38ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
orderly-room, and go. Behind me they are
already hauling Franz on to a waterproof sheet.
Outside the door I am aware of the darkness and
the wind as a deliverance. I breathe as deep as I
can, and feel the breeze in my face, warm and
soft as never before. Thoughts of girls, of flowery
meadows, of white clouds suddenly come into
my head. My feet begin to move forward in my
boots, I go quicker, I run. Soldiers pass by me, I
hear their voices without understanding. The
earth is streaming with forces which pour into
me through the soles of my feet. The night
crackles electrically, the front thunders like a
concert of drums. My limbs move supplely, I feel
my joints strong, I breathe the air deeply. The
night lives, I live. I feel a hunger, greater than
comes from the belly alone.
Müller stands in front of the hut waiting for me.
I give him the boots. We go in and he tries them
on. They fit well.
He roots among his supplies and offers me a fine
piece of saveloy. With it goes hot tea and rum.
39Erich Maria Remarque
THREE
Reinforcements have arrived. The vacancies have
been filled and the sacks of straw in the huts are
already booked. Some of them are old hands,
but there are twenty-five men of a later draught
from the base. They are about two years younger
than us. Kropp nudges me: "Seen the infants?"
I nod. We stick out our chests, shave in the
open, shove our hands in our pockets, inspect
the recruits and feel ourselves stone-age
veterans.
Katczinsky joins us. We stroll past the
horseboxes and go over to the reinforcements,
who are already being issued with gas masks
and coffee.
"Long time since you've had anything decent to
eat, eh?" Kat asks one of the youngsters.
He grimaces. "For breakfast, turnip-bread--
lunch, turnip-stew--supper, turnip-cutlets and
turnip- salad." Kat gives a knowing whistle.
40ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
"Bread made of turnips? You've been in luck, it's
nothing new for it to be made of sawdust. But
what do you say to haricot beans? Have some?"
The youngster turns red: "You can't kid me."
Katczinsky merely says: "Fetch your mess-tin."
We follow curiously. He takes us to a tub beside
his straw sack. Sure enough it is half full of beef
and beans. Katczinsky plants himself in front of
it like a general and says: "Sharp eyes and light
fingers! That's what the Prussians say."
We are surprised. "Great guts, Kat, how did you
come by that?" I ask him.
"Ginger was glad I took it. I gave him three
pieces of parachute-silk for it. Cold beans taste
fine, too."
Patronisingly he gives the youngster a portion
and says: "Next time you come with your mess-
tin have a cigar or a chew of tobacco in your
other hand. Get me?" Then he turns to us. "You
get off scot free, of course."
We couldn't do without Katczinsky; he has a
sixth sense. There are such people everywhere
but one does not appreciate it at first. Every
company has one or two. Katczinsky is the
smartest I know. By trade he is a cobbler, I
believe, but that hasn't anything to do with it; he
understands all trades. It's a good thing to be
friends with him, as Kropp and I are, and Haie
Westhus too, more or less. But Haie is rather the
executive arm, operating under Kat's orders
41Erich Maria Remarque
when things come to blows. For that he has his
qualifications.
For example, we land at night in some entirely
unknown spot, a sorry hole, that has been eaten
out to the very walls. We are quartered in a
small dark factory adapted to the purpose. There
are beds in it, or rather bunks--a couple of
wooden beams over which wire netting is
stretched.
Wire netting is hard. And there's nothing to put
on it. Our waterproof sheets are too thin. We use
our blankets to cover ourselves.
Kat looks at the place and then says to Haie
Westhus "Come with me." They go off to explore.
Half an hour later they are back again with arms
full of straw. Kat has found a horse-box with
straw in it. Now we might sleep if we weren't so
terribly hungry.
Kropp asks an artilleryman who has been some
time in this neighbourhood: "Is there a canteen
anywhere abouts?"
"Is there a what?" he laughs. "There's nothing to
be had here. You won't find so much as a crust
of bread here."
"Aren't there any inhabitants here at all then?"
He spits. "Yes, a few. But they hang round the
cook-house and beg."
42ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
"That's a bad business!--Then we'll have to pull
in our belts and wait till the rations come up in
the morning."
But I see Kat has put on his cap.
"Where to, Kat?" I ask.
"Just to explore the place a bit." He strolls off.
The artilleryman grins scornfully. "Go ahead and
explore. But don't strain yourself in carrying
what you find."
Disappointed we lie down and consider whether
we couldn't have a go at the iron rations. But it's
too risky; so we try to get a wink of sleep.
Kropp divides a cigarette and hands me half.
Tjaden gives an account of his national dish--
broad- beans and bacon. He despises it when
not flavoured with bog-myrtle, and, "for God's
sake, let it all be cooked together, not the
potatoes, the beans, and the bacon separately."
Someone growls that he will pound Tjaden into
bog-myrtle if he doesn't shut up. Then all
becomes quiet in the big room--only the candles
flickering from the necks of a couple of bottles
and the artilleryman spitting every now and
then.
We are just dozing off when the door opens and
Kat appears. I think I must be dreaming; he has
two loaves of bread under his arm and a
bloodstained sandbag full of horse-flesh in his
hand.
43Erich Maria Remarque
The artilleryman's pipe drops from his mouth.
He feels the bread. "Real bread, by God, and still
hot too?"
Kat gives no explanation. He has the bread, the
rest doesn't matter. I'm sure that if he were
planted down in the middle of the desert, in half
an hour he would have gathered together a
supper of roast meat, dates, and wine.
"Cut some wood," he says curtly to Haie.
Then he hauls out a frying pan from under his
coat, and a handful of salt as well as a lump of
fat from his pocket. He has thought of
everything. Haie makes a fire on the floor. It
lights up the empty room of the factory. We
climb out of bed.
The artilleryman hesitates. He wonders whether
to praise Kat and so perhaps gam a little for
himself. But Katczinsky doesn't even see him, he
might as well be thin air. He goes off cursing.
Kat knows the way to roast horse-flesh so that
it's tender. It shouldn't be put straight into the
pan, that makes it tough. It should be boiled
first in a little water. With our knives we squat
round in a circle and fill our bellies.
That is Kat. If for one hour in a year something
eatable were to be had in some one place only,
within that hour, as if moved by a vision, he
would put on his cap, go out and walk directly
there, as though following a compass, and find
it.
44ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
He finds everything--if it is cold, a small stove
and wood, hay and straw, a table and chairs--
but above all food. It is uncanny; one would
think he conjured it out of the air. His
masterpiece was four boxes of lobsters.
Admittedly we would rather have had a good
beef steak.
We have settled ourselves on the sunny side of
the hut. There is a smell of tar, of summer, and
of sweaty feet. Kat sits beside me. He likes to
talk. Today we have done an hour's saluting drill
because Tjaden failed to salute a major smartly
enough. Kat can't get it out of his head.
"You take it from me, we are losing the war
because we can salute too well," he says.
Kropp stalks up, with his breeches rolled up and
his feet bare. He lays out his washed socks to
dry on the grass. Kat turns his eyes to heaven,
lets off a mighty fart, and says meditatively:
"Every little bean must be heard as well as
seen."
The two begin to argue. At the same time they
lay a bottle of beer on the result of an air-fight
that's going on above us. Katczinsky won't
budge from the opinion which as an old Front-
hog, he rhymes: Give 'em all the same grub and
all the same pay And the war would be over and
done in a day.
Kropp on the other hand is a thinker. He
proposes that a declaration of war should be a
kind of popular festival with entrance-tickets
45Erich Maria Remarque
and bands, like a bull fight. Then in the arena
the ministers
and generals of the two countries, dressed in
bathing-drawers and armed with clubs, can
have it
out among themselves. Whoever survives, his
country wins. That would be much simpler and
more just than this arrangement, where the
wrong people do the fighting.
The subject is dropped. Then the conversation
turns to drill.
A picture comes before me. Burning midday in
the barrack-yard. The heat hangs over the
square. The barracks are deserted. Every thing
sleeps. All one hears is the drummers practising;
they have installed themselves somewhere and
practise brokenly, dully, monotonously. What a
concord! Midday heat, barrack square, and
drummers beating!
The windows of the barracks are empty and
dark. From some of them trousers are hanging
to dry. The rooms are cool and one looks toward
them longingly.
O dark, musty platoon huts, with the iron
bedsteads, the chequered bedding, the lockers
and the stools! Even you can become the object
of desire; out here you have a faint resemblance
to home; your rooms, full of the smell of stale
food, sleep, smoke, and clothes.
46ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Katczinsky paints it all in lively colours. What
would we not give to be able to return to it!
Farther back than that our thoughts dare not
go.
Those early morning hours of instruction--"What
are the parts of the 98 rifle?"--the midday hours
of physical training--"Pianist forward! By the
right, quick march. Report to the cook-house for
potato-peeling."
We indulge in reminiscences. Kropp laughs
suddenly and says: "Change at Lohne!"
That was our corporal's favourite game. Lohne is
a railway junction. In order that our fellows
going on shouldn't get lost there, Himmelstoss
used to practise the change in the barrack-room.
We had to learn that at Lohne, to reach the
branch-line, we must pass through a subway.
The beds represented the subway and each man
stood at attention on the left side of his bed.
Then came the command: "Change at Lohne!"
and like lightning everyone scrambled under the
bed to the opposite side. We practised this for
hours on end.
Meanwhile the German aeroplane has been shot
down. Like a comet it bursts into a streamer of
smoke and falls headlong. Kropp has lost the
bottle of beer. Disgruntled he counts out the
money from his wallet.
"Surely Himmelstoss was a very different fellow
as a postman," say I, after Albert's
47Erich Maria Remarque
disappointment has subsided. "Then how does it
come that he's such a bully as a drill-sergeant?"
The question revives Kropp, more particularly as
he hears there's no more beer in the canteen.
"It's not only Himmelstoss, there are lots of
them. As sure as they get a stripe or a star they
become different men, just as though they'd
swallowed concrete."
"That's the uniform," I suggest.
"Roughly speaking it is," says Kat, and prepares
for a long speech; "but the root of the matter lies
somewhere. For instance, if you train a dog to
eat potatoes and then afterwards put a piece of
meat in front of him, he'll snap at it, it's his
nature. And if you give a man a little bit of
authority he behaves just the same way, he
snaps at it too. The things are precisely the
same. In himself man is essentially a beast, only
he butters it over like a slice of bread with a little
decorum. The army is based on that; one man
must always have power over the other. The
mischief is merely that each one has much too
much power. A non-com, can torment a private,
a lieutenant a non-com, a captain a lieutenant,
until he goes mad. And because they know they
can, they all soon acquire the habit more or less.
Take a simple case: we are marching back from
the parade-ground dog- tired. Then comes the
order to sing. We sing spiritlessly, for it is all we
can do to trudge along with our rifles. At once
the company is turned about and has to do
48ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
another hour's drill as punishment. On the
march back the order to sing is given again, and
once more we start. Now what's the use of all
that? It's simply that the company commander's
head has been turned by having so much power.
And nobody blames him. On the contrary, he is
praised for being strict. That, of course, is only a
trifling instance, but it holds also in very
different affairs. Now I ask you: Let a man be
whatever you like in peacetime, what occupation
is there in which he can behave like that without
getting a crack on the nose? He can only do that
in the army. It goes to the heads of them all, you
see. And the more insignificant a man has been
in civil life the worse it takes him."
"They say, of course, there must be discipline,"
ventures Kropp meditatively.
"True," growls Kat, "they always do. And it may
be so; still it oughtn't to become an abuse. But
you try to explain that to a black-smith or a
labourer or a workman, you try to make that
clear to a peasant--and that's what most of them
are here. All he sees is that he has been put
through the mill and sent to the front, but he
knows well enough what he must do and what
not. It's simply amazing, I tell you, that the
ordinary tommy sticks it all up here in the front-
line. Simply amazing!"
No one protests. Everyone knows that drill
ceases only in the frontline and begins again a
few miles behind, with all absurdities of saluting
49Erich Maria Remarque
and parade. It is an Iron law that the soldier
must be employed under every circumstance.
Here Tjaden comes up with a flushed face. He is
so excited that he stutters. Beaming with
satisfaction he stammers out: "Himmelstoss is
on his way. He's coming to the front!"
Tjaden has a special grudge against
Himmelstoss, because of the way he educated
him in the barracks. Tjaden wets his bed, he
does it at night in his sleep. Himmelstoss
maintained that it was sheer laziness and
invented a method worthy of himself for curing
Tjaden.
He hunted up another piss-a-bed, named
Kindervater, from a neighbouring unit, and
quartered him with Tjaden. In the huts there
were the usual bunks, one above the other in
pairs, with mattresses of wire netting.
Himmelstoss put these two so that one occupied
the upper and the other the lower bunk. The
man underneath of course had a vile time. The
next night they were
changed over and the lower one put on top so
that he could retaliate. That was Himmelstoss's
system of selfeducation.
The idea was not low but ill-conceived.
Unfortunately it accomplished nothing because
the first assumption was wrong: it was not
laziness in either of them. Anyone who looked at
their sallow skin could see that. The matter
50ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
ended in one of them always sleeping on the
floor, where he frequently caught cold.
Meanwhile Haie sits down beside us. He winks
at me and rubs his paws thoughtfully. We once
spent the finest day of our army-life together--
the day before we left for the front. We had been
allotted to one of the recently formed regiments,
but were first to be sent back for equipment to
the garrison, not to the reinforcement-depot, of
course, but to another barracks. We were due to
leave next morning early. In the evening we
prepared ourselves to square accounts with
Himmelstoss.
We had sworn for weeks past to do this. Kropp
had even gone so far as to propose entering the
postal service in peacetime in order to be
Himmelstoss's superior when he became a
postman again. He revelled in the thought of
how he would grind him. It was this that made it
impossible for him to crush us altogether--we
always reckoned that later, at the end of the
war, we would have our revenge on him.
In the meantime we decided to give him a good
hiding. What could he do to us anyhow if he
didn't recognise us and we left early in the
morning?
We knew which pub he used to visit every
evening. Returning to the barracks he had to go
along a dark, uninhabited road. There we waited
for him behind a pile of stones. I had a bed-cover
with me. We trembled with suspense, hoping he
51Erich Maria Remarque
would be alone. At last we heard his footstep,
which we recognised easily, so often had we
heard it in the mornings as the door flew open
and he bawled: "Get up!"
"Alone?" whispered Kropp.
"Alone."
I slipped round the pile of stones with Tjaden.
Himmelstoss seemed a little elevated; he was
singing. His belt-buckle gleamed. He came on
unsuspectingly.
We seized the bed-cover, made a quick leap,
threw it over his head from behind and pulled it
round him so that he stood there in a white sack
unable to raise his arms. The singing stopped.
The next moment Haie Westhus was there, and
spreading his arms he shoved us back in order
to be first in. He put himself in position with
evident satisfaction, raised his arm like a signal-
mast and his hand like a coal-shovel and fetched
such a blow on the white sack as would have
felled an ox.
Himmelstoss was thrown down, he rolled five
yards and started to yell. But we were prepared
for that and had brought a cushion. Haie
squatted down, laid the cushion on his knees,
felt where Himmelstoss's head was and pressed
it down on the pillow. Immediately his voice was
muffled. Haie let him get a gasp of air every so
often, when he would give a mighty yell that was
immediately hushed.
52ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Tjaden unbuttoned Himmelstoss's braces and
pulled down his trousers, holding the whip
meantime in his teeth. Then he stood up and set
to work.
It was a wonderful picture: Himmelstoss on the
ground; Haie bending over him with a fiendish
grin and his mouth open with bloodlust,
Himmelstoss's head on his knees; then the
convulsed striped drawers, the knock knees,
executing at every blow most original movements
in the lowered breeches, and towering over them
like a woodcutter the indefatigable Tjaden. In the
end we had to drag him away to get our turn.
Finally Haie stood Himmelstoss on his feet again
and gave one last personal remonstrance. As he
stretched out his right arm preparatory to giving
him a box on the ear he looked as if he were
going to reach down a star.
Himmelstoss toppled over. Haie stood him up
again, made ready and fetched him a second,
well-aimed beauty with the left hand.
Himmelstoss yelled and made off on all fours.
His striped postman's backside gleamed in the
moonlight.
We disappeared at full speed.
Haie looked round once again and said
wrathfully, satisfied and rather mysteriously:
"Revenge is black-pudding."
Himmelstoss ought to have been pleased; his
saying that we should each educate one another
53Erich Maria Remarque
had borne fruit for himself. We had become
successful students of his method.
He never discovered whom he had to thank for
the business. At any rate he scored a bed-cover
out of it; for when we returned a few hours later
to look for it, it was no longer to be found.
That evening's work made us more or less
content to leave next morning. And an old buffer
was pleased to describe us as "young heroes."
54ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
FOUR
We have to go up on wiring fatigue. The motor
lorries roll up after dark. We climb in. It is a
warm evening and the twilight seems like a
canopy under whose shelter we feel drawn
together. Even the stingy Tjaden gives me a
cigarette and then a light.
We stand jammed in together, shoulder to
shoulder, there is no room to sit. But we do not
expect that. Müller is in a good mood for once;
he is wearing his new boots.
The engines drone, the lorries bump and rattle.
The roads are worn and full of holes. We dare
not show a light so we lurch along and are often
almost pitched out. That does not worry us,
however. It can happen if it likes; a broken arm
is better than a hole in the guts, and many a
man would be thankful enough for such a
chance of finding his home way again.
Beside us stream the munition-columns in long
files. They are making the pace, they overtake us
55Erich Maria Remarque
continually. We joke with them and they answer
back.
A wall becomes visible, it belongs to a house
which lies on the side of the road. I suddenly
prick up my ears. Am I deceived? Again I hear
distinctly the cackle of geese. A glance at
Katczinsky--a glance from him to me; we
understand one another.
"Kat, I hear some aspirants for the frying-pan
over there."
He nods. "It will be attended to when we come
back. I have their number."
Of course Kat has their number. He knows all
about every leg of goose within a radius of fifteen
miles.
The lorries arrive at the artillery lines. The gun-
emplacements are camouflaged with bushes
against aerial observation, and look like a kind
of military Feast of the Tabernacles. These
branches might seem gay and cheerful were not
cannon embowered there.
The air becomes acrid with the smoke of the
guns and the fog. The fumes of powder taste
bitter on the tongue. The roar of the guns makes
our lorry stagger, the reverberation rolls raging
away to the rear, everything quakes. Our faces
change imperceptibly. We are not, indeed, in the
front- line, but only in the reserves, yet in every
face can be read: This is the front, now we are
within its embrace.
56ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
It is not fear. Men who have been up as often as
we have become thick skinned. Only the young
recruits are agitated. Kat explains to them: "That
was a twelve-inch. You can tell by the report;
now you'll hear the burst."
But the muffled thud of the burst does not
reach us. It is swallowed up in the general
murmur of the front: Kat listens: "There'll be a
bombardment to-night."
We all listen. The front is restless. "The Tommies
are firing already," says Kropp.
The shelling can be heard distinctly. It is the
English batteries to the right of our section.
They are beginning an hour too soon. According
to us they start punctually at ten o'clock.
"What's got them?" says Müller, "their clocks
must be fast."
"There'll be a bombardment, I tell you. I can feel
it in my bones." Kat shrugs his shoulders.
Three guns open fire close beside us. The burst
of flame shoots across the fog, the guns roar and
boom. We shiver and are glad to think that we
shall be back in the huts early in the morning.
Our faces are neither paler nor more flushed
than usual; they are not more tense nor more
flabby--and yet they are changed. We feel that in
our blood a contact has shot home. That is no
figure of speech; it is fact. It is the front, the
consciousness of the front, that makes this
contact. The moment that the first shells whistle
57Erich Maria Remarque
over and the air is rent with the explosions there
is suddenly in our veins, in our hands, in our
eyes a tense waiting, a watching, a heightening
alertness, a strange sharpening of the senses.
The body with one bound is in full readiness.
It often seems to me as though it were the
vibrating, shuddering air that with a noiseless
leap springs upon us; or as though the front
itself emitted an electric current which
awakened unknown nerve-centres.
Every time it is the same. We start out for the
front plain soldiers, either cheerful or gloomy:
then come the first gun-emplacements and every
word of our speech has a new ring.
When Kat stands in front of the hut and says:
"There'll be a bombardment," that is merely his
own opinion; but if he says it here, then the
sentence has the sharpness of a bayonet in the
moonlight, it cuts clean through the thought, it
thrusts nearer and speaks to this unknown
tiling that is awakened in us, a dark meaning--
"There'll be a bombardment." Perhaps it is our
inner and most secret life that shivers and falls
on guard.
To me the front is a mysterious whirlpool.
Though I am in still water far away from its
centre, I feel the whirl of the vortex sucking me
slowly, irresistibly, inescapably into itself.
From the earth, from the air, sustaining forces
pour into us--mostly from the earth. To no man
does the earth mean so much as to the soldier.
58ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
When he presses himself down upon her long
and powerfully, when he buries his face and his
limbs deep in her from the fear of death by shell-
fire, then she is his only friend, his brother, his
mother; he stifles his terror and his cries in her
silence and her security; she shelters him and
releases him for ten seconds to live, to run, ten
seconds of life; receives him again and often for
ever.
Earth!--Earth!--Earth!
Earth with thy folds, and hollows, and holes,
into which a man may fling himself and crouch
down. In the spasm of terror, under the hailing
of annihilation, in the bellowing death of the
explosions, O Earth, thou grantest us the great
resisting surge of new-won life. Our being,
almost utterly carried away by the fury of the
storm, streams back through our hands from
thee, and we, thy redeemed ones, bury ourselves
in thee, and through the long minutes in a mute
agony of hope bite into thee with our lips!
At the sound of the first droning of the shells we
rush back, in one part of our being, a thousand
years. By the animal instinct that is awakened
in us we are led and protected. It is not
conscious; it is far quicker, much more sure,
less fallible, than consciousness. One cannot
explain it. A man is walking along without
thought or heed;--suddenly he throws himself
down on the ground and a storm of fragments
flies harmlessly over him;--yet he cannot
59Erich Maria Remarque
remember either to have heard the shell coming
or to have thought of flinging himself down. But
had he not abandoned himself to the impulse he
would now be a heap of mangled flesh. It is this
other, this second sight in us, that has thrown
us to the ground and saved us, without our
knowing how. If it were not so, there would
notice one man alive from Flanders to the
Vosges.
We march up, moody or good-tempered soldiers-
-we reach the zone where the front begins and
become on the instant human animals.
An indigent looking wood receives us. We pass
by the soup-kitchens. Under cover of the wood
we climb out. The lorries turn back. They are to
collect us again in the morning before dawn.
Mist and the smoke of guns lie breast-high over
the fields. The moon is shining. Along the road
troops file. Their helmets gleam softly in the
moonlight. The heads and the rifles stand out
above the white mist, nodding heads, rocking
barrels. Farther on the mist ends. Here the
heads become figures; coats, trousers, and boots
appear out of the mist as from a milky pool.
They become a column. The column marches on,
straight ahead, the figures resolve themselves
into a block, individuals are no longer
recognisable, the dark wedge presses onward,
fantastically topped by the heads and weapons
floating on the milky pool. A column--not men at
all.
60ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Guns and munition wagons are moving along a
cross-road. The backs of the horses shine in the
moonlight, their movements are beautiful, they
toss their heads, and their eyes gleam. The guns
and the wagons float past the dun background
of the moonlit landscape, the riders in their steel
helmets resemble knights of a forgotten time; it
is strangely beautiful and arresting.
We push on to the pioneer dump. Some of us
load our shoulders with pointed and twisted iron
stakes; others thrust smooth iron rods through
rolls of wire and go off with them. The burdens
are awkward and heavy.
The ground becomes more broken. From ahead
come warnings: "Look out, deep shell-hole on
the left"--"Mind, trenches"-- Our eyes peer out,
our feet and our sticks feel in front of us before
they take the weight of the body. Suddenly the
line halts; I bump my face against the roll of wire
carried by the man in front and curse.
There are some shell-smashed lorries in the
road. Another order: "Cigarettes and pipes out."
We are near the line.
In the meantime it has become pitch dark. We
skirt a small wood and then have the front-line
immediately before us.
An uncertain red glow spreads along the skyline
from one end to the other. It is in perpetual
movement, punctuated with the bursts of flame
from the nozzles of the batteries. Balls of light
rise up high above it, silver and red spheres
61Erich Maria Remarque
which explode and rain down in showers of red,
white, and green stars. French rockets go up,
which unfold a silk parachute to the air and drift
slowly down. They light up everything as bright
as day, their light shines on us and we see our
shadows sharply outlined on the ground. They
hover for the space of a minute before they burn
out. Immediately fresh ones shoot up in the sky,
and again green, red, and blue stars.
"Bombardment," says Kat.
The thunder of the guns swells to a single heavy
roar and then breaks up again into separate
explosions. The dry bursts of the machine-guns
rattle. Above us the air teems with invisible swift
movement, with howls, pipings, and hisses. They
are smaller shells;--and amongst them, booming
through the night like an organ, go the great
coal-boxes and the heavies. They have a hoarse,
distant bellow like a rutting stag and make their
way high above the howl and whistle of the
smaller shells. It reminds me of flocks of wild
geese when I hear them. Last autumn the wild
geese flew day after day across the path of the
shells.
The searchlights begin to sweep the dark sky.
They slide along it like gigantic tapering rulers.
One of them pauses, and quivers a little.
Immediately a second is beside him, a black
insect is caught between them and tries to
escape--the airman. He hesitates, is blinded and
falls.
62ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
At regular intervals we ram in the iron stakes.
Two men hold a roll and the others spool off the
barbed wire. It is that awful stuff with close-set,
long spikes. I am not used to unrolling it and
tear my hand.
After a few hours it is done. But there is still
some time before the lorries come. Most of us lie
down and sleep. I try also, but it has turned too
chilly. We know we are not far from the sea
because we are constantly waked by the cold.
Once I fall fast asleep. Then wakening suddenly
with a start I do not know where I am. I see the
stars, I see the rockets, and for a moment have
the impression that I have fallen asleep at a
garden fÃªte. I don't know whether it is morning
or evening, I lie in the pale cradle of the twilight,
and listen for soft words which will come, soft
and near--am I crying? I put my hand to my
eyes, it is so fantastic, am I a child? Smooth
skin;--it lasts only a second, then I recognise the
silhouette of Katczinsky. The old veteran, he sits
quietly and smokes his pipe--a covered pipe of
course. When he sees I am awake, he says:
"That gave you a fright. It was only a nose-cap, it
landed in the bushes over there."
I sit up, I feel myself strangely alone. It's good
Kat is there. He gazes thoughtfully at the front
and says: "Mighty fine fire-works if they weren't
so dangerous."
One lands behind us. Some recruits jump up
terrified. A couple of minutes later another
63Erich Maria Remarque
comes over, nearer this time. Kat knocks out his
pipe. "We're in for it."
Then it begins in earnest. We crawl away as well
as we can in our haste. The next lands fair
amongst us. Two fellows cry out. Green rockets
shoot up on the sky-line. Barrage. The mud flies
high, fragments whizz past. The crack of the
guns is heard long after the roar of the
explosions.
Beside us lies a fair-headed recruit in utter
terror. He has buried his face in his hands, his
helmet has fallen off I fish hold of it and try to
put it back on his head. He looks up, pushes the
helmet off and like a child creeps under my arm,
his head close to my breast. The little shoulders
heave. Shoulders just like Kemmerich's. I let him
be. So that the helmet should be of some use I
stick it on his behind;--not for a jest, but out of
consideration, since that is his highest part. And
though there is plenty of meat there, a shot in it
can be damned painful. Besides, a man has to
lie for months on his belly in the hospital, and
afterwards he would be almost sure to have a
limp.
It's got someone pretty badly. Cries are heard
between the explosions.
At last it grows quiet. The fire has lifted over us
and is now dropping on the reserves. We risk a
look. Red rockets shoot up to the sky.
Apparently there's an attack coming.
64ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Where we are it is still quiet. I sit up and shake
the recruit by the shoulder. "All over, kid! It's all
right this time."
He looks round him dazedly. "You'll get used to
it soon," I tell him.
He sees his helmet and puts it on. Gradually he
comes to. Then suddenly he turns fiery red and
looks confused. Cautiously he reaches his hand
to his behind and looks at me dismally.
I understand at once: Gun-shy. That wasn't the
reason I had stuck his helmet over it. "That's no
disgrace," I reassure him: "Many's the man
before you has had his pants full after the first
bombardment. Go behind that bush there and
throw your underpants away. Get along --
"
"
--
He goes off. Things become quieter, but the cries
do not cease. "What's up, Albert?" I ask.
"A couple of columns over there got it in the
neck."
The cries continued. It is not men, they could
not cry so terribly.
"Wounded horses," says Kat.
It's unendurable. It is the moaning of the world,
it is the martyred creation, wild with anguish,
filled with terror, and groaning.
We are pale. Detering stands up. "God! For God's
sake! Shoot them."
65Erich Maria Remarque
He is a farmer and very fond of horses. It gets
under his skin. Then as if deliberately the fire
dies down again. The screaming of the beasts
becomes louder. One can no longer distinguish
whence in this now quiet silvery landscape it
comes; ghostly, invisible, it is everywhere,
between heaven and earth it rolls on
immeasurably. Detering raves and yells out:
"Shoot them! Shoot them, can't you? damn you
again!"
"They must look after the men first," says Kat
quietly.
We stand up and try to see where it is. If we
could only see the animals we should be able to
endure it better. Müller has a pair of glasses. We
see a dark group, bearers with stretchers, and
larger black clumps moving about. Those are the
wounded horses. But not all of them. Some
gallop away in the distance, fall down, and then
run on farther. The belly of one is ripped open,
the guts trail out. He becomes tangled in them
and falls, then he stands up again.
Detering raises up his gun and aims. Kat hits it
in the air. "Are you mad--?"
Detering trembles and throws his rifle on the
ground.
We sit down and hold our ears. But this
appalling noise, these groans and screams
penetrate, they penetrate everywhere.
66ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
We can bear almost anything. But now the
sweat breaks out on us. We must get up and
run no matter where, but where these cries can
no longer be heard. And it is not men, only
horses.
From the dark group stretchers move off again.
Then single shots crack out. The black heap
convulses and then sinks down. At last! But still
it is not the end. The men cannot overtake the
wounded beasts which fly in their pain, their
wide open mouths full of anguish. One of the
men goes down on one knee, a shot--one horse
drops--another. The last one props itself on its
forelegs and drags itself round in a circle like a
merry-go-round; squatting, it drags round in
circles on its stiffened forelegs, apparently its
back is broken. The soldier runs up and shoots
it. Slowly, humbly, it sinks to the ground.
We take our hands from our ears. The cries are
silenced. Only a long-drawn, dying sigh still
hangs on the air.
Then only again the rockets, the singing of the
shells and the stars there--most strange.
Detering walks up and down cursing: "Like to
know what harm they've done." He returns to it
once again. His voice is agitated, it sounds
almost dignified as he says: "I tell you it is the
vilest baseness to use horses in the war."
We go back. It is time we returned to the lorries.
The sky is become brighter. Three o'clock in the
67Erich Maria Remarque
morning. The breeze is fresh and cool, the pale
hour makes our faces look grey.
We trudge onward in single file through the
trenches and shell-holes and come again to the
zone of mist. Katczinsky is restive, that's a bad
sign.
"What's up, Kat?" says Kropp.
"I wish I were back home." Home--he means the
huts.
"We'll soon be out of it, Kat."
He is nervous. "I don't know, I don't know--
"
We come to the communication-trench and then
to the open fields. The little wood reappears; we
know every foot of ground here. There's the
cemetery with the mounds and the black
crosses.
That moment it breaks out behind us, swells,
roars, and thunders. We duck down--a cloud of
flame shoots up a hundred yards ahead of us.
The next minute under a second explosion part
of the wood rises slowly in the air, three or four
trees sail up and then crash to pieces. The shells
begin to hiss like safety-valves--heavy fire--
"Take cover!" yells somebody--"Cover!"
The fields are flat, the wood is too distant and
dangerous--the only cover is the graveyard and
the mounds. We stumble across in the dark and
as though he had been spat there every man lies
glued behind a mound.
68ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Not a moment too soon. The dark goes mad. It
heaves and raves. Darknesses blacker than the
night rush on us with giant strides, over us and
away. The flames of the explosions light up the
graveyard.
There is no escape anywhere. By the light of the
shells I try to get a view of the fields. They are a
surging sea, daggers of flame from the
explosions leap up like fountains. It is
impossible for anyone to break through it.
The wood vanishes, it is pounded, crushed, torn
to pieces. We must stay here in the graveyard.
The earth bursts before us. It rains clods. I feel a
smack. My sleeve is torn away by a splinter. I
shut my fist. No pain. Still that does not
reassure me: wounds don't hurt till afterwards. I
feel the arm all over. It is grazed but sound. Now
a crack on the skull, I begin to lose
consciousness. Like
lightning the thought comes to me: Don't faint! I
sink down in the black broth and immediately
come up to the top again. A splinter slashes into
my helmet, but has already travelled so far that
it does not go through. I wipe the mud out of my
eyes. A hole is torn up in front of me. Shells
hardly ever land in the same hole twice, I'll get
into it. With one lunge, I shoot as flat as a fish
over the ground; there it whistles again, quickly
I crouch together, claw for cover, feel something
on the left, shove in beside it, it gives way, I
groan, the earth leaps, the blast thunders in my
69Erich Maria Remarque
ears, I creep under the yielding thing, cover
myself with it, draw it over me, it is wood, cloth,
cover, cover, miserable cover against the
whizzing splinters.
I open my eyes--my fingers grasp a sleeve, an
arm. A wounded man? I yell to him--no answer--
a dead man. My hand gropes farther, splinters of
wood--now I remember again that we are lying in
the graveyard.
But the shelling is stronger than everything. It
wipes out the sensibilities, I merely crawl still
farther under the coffin, it shall protect me,
though Death himself lies in it.
Before me gapes the shell-hole. I grasp it with
my eyes as with fists. With one leap I must be in
it. There, I get a smack in the face, a hand
clamps onto my shoulder--has the dead man
waked up?--The hand shakes me, I turn my
head, in the second of light I stare into the face
of Katczinsky, he has his mouth wide open and
is yelling. I hear nothing, he rattles me, comes
nearer, in a momentary lull his voice reaches
me: "Gas--Gaas--Gaaas--Pass it on."
I grab for my gas-mask. Some distance from me
there lies someone. I think of nothing but this:
That fellow there must know: Gaaas--Gaaas-- I
call, I lean toward him, I swipe at him with the
satchel, he doesn't see--once again, again--he
merely ducks--it's a recruit--I look at Kat
desperately, he has his mask on--I pull out
mine, too, my helmet falls to one side, it slips
70ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
over my face, I reach the man, his satchel is on
the side nearest me, I seize the mask, pull it over
his head, he understands, I let go and with a
jump drop into the shell-hole.
The dull thud of the gas-shells mingles with the
crashes of the high explosives. A bell sounds
between the explosions, gongs, and metal
clappers warning everyone--Gas--Gas--Gaas.
Someone plumps down behind me, another. I
wipe the goggles of my mask clear of the moist
breath. It is Kat, Kropp, and someone else. All
four of us lie there in heavy, watchful suspense
and breathe as lightly as possible.
These first minutes with the mask decide
between life and death: is it air-tight? I
remember the awful sights in the hospital: the
gas patients who in day-long suffocation cough
up their burnt lungs in clots.
Cautiously, the mouth applied to the valve, I
breathe. The gas still creeps over the ground and
sinks into all hollows. Like a big, soft jellyfish it
floats into our shell-hole and lolls there
obscenely. I nudge Kat, it is better to crawl out
and lie on top than to stay where the gas collects
most. But
we don't get as far as that; a second
bombardment begins. It is no longer as though
shells roared; it is the earth itself raging.
With a crash something black bears down on us.
It lands close beside us; a coffin thrown up.
71Erich Maria Remarque
I see Kat move and I crawl across. The coffin has
hit the fourth man in our hole on his out-
stretched arm. He tries to tear off his gas-mask
with the other hand. Kropp seizes him just in
time, twists the hand sharply behind his back
and holds it fast. Kat and I proceed to free the
wounded arm. The coffin lid is loose and bursts
open, we are easily able to pull it off, we toss the
corpse out, it slides down to the bottom of the
shell-hole, then we try to loosen the under-part.
Fortunately the man swoons and Kropp is able
to help us. We no longer have to be careful, but
work away till the coffin gives with a sigh before
the spade that we have dug in under it.
It has grown lighter. Kat takes a piece of the lid,
places it under the shattered arm, and we wrap
all our bandages round it. For the moment we
can do no more.
Inside the gas-mask my head booms and roars--
it is nigh bursting. My lungs are tight, they
breathe always the same hot, used-up air, the
veins on my temples are swollen. I feel I am
suffocating.
A grey light filters through to us. I climb out over
the edge of the shell-hole. In the duty twilight
lies a leg torn clean off; the boot is quite whole, I
take that all in at a glance. Now something
stands up a few yards distant. I polish the
windows, in my excitement they are immediately
dimmed again. I peer through them, the man
there no longer wears his mask.
72ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
I wait some seconds--he has not collapsed--he
looks around and makes a few paces--rattling in
my throat I tear my mask off too and fall down,
the air streams into me like cold water, my eyes
are bursting the wave sweeps over me and
extinguishes me.
The shelling has ceased, I turn towards the
crater and beckoning to the others. They take off
their masks. We lift up the wounded man, one
taking his splinted arm. And so we stumble off
hastily.
The graveyard is a mass of wreckage. Coffins
and corpses lie strewn about. They have been
killed once again; but each of them that was
flung up saved one of us.
The hedge is destroyed, the rails of the light
railway are torn up and rise stiffly in the air in
great arches. Someone lies in front of us. We
stop; Kropp goes on alone with the wounded
man.
The man on the ground is a recruit. His hip is
covered with blood; he is so exhausted that I feel
for my water-bottle where I have rum and tea.
Kat restrains my hand and stoops over him.
"Where's it got you comrade?"
His eyes move. He is too weak to answer.
We slit open his trousers carefully. He groans.
"Gently, gently, it is much better--
"
73Erich Maria Remarque
If he has been hit in the stomach he oughtn't to
drink anything. There's no vomiting, that's a
good sign. We lay the hip bare. It is one mass of
mincemeat and bone splinters. The joint has
been hit. This lad won't walk any more.
I wet his temples with a moistened finger and
give him a swig. His eyes move again. We see
now that the right arm is bleeding as well.
Kat spreads out two wads of dressing as wide as
possible so that they will cover the wound. I look
for something to bind loosely round it. We have
nothing more, so I slip up the wounded man's
trouser leg still farther in order to use a piece of
his underpants as a bandage. But he is wearing
none. I now look at him closely. He is the fair-
headed boy of a little while ago.
In the meantime Kat has taken a bandage from
a dead man's pocket and we carefully bind the
wound. I say to the youngster who looks at us
fixedly: "We're going for a stretcher now--
"
Then he opens his mouth and whispers: "Stay
here--
"
"We'll be back again soon," says Kat, "We are
only going to get a stretcher for you."
We don't know if he understands. He whimpers
like a child and plucks at us: "Don't go away--
"
Kat looks around and whispers: "Shouldn't we
just take a revolver and put an end to it?"
74ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
The youngster will hardly survive the carrying,
and at the most he will only last a few days.
What he has gone through so far is nothing to
what he's in for till he dies. Now he is numb and
feels nothing. In an hour he will become one
screaming bundle of intolerable pain. Every day
that he can live will be a howling torture. And to
whom does it matter whether he has them or not
- I nod. "Yes, Kat, we ought to put him out of his
misery."
He stands still a moment. He has made up his
mind. We look round--but we are no longer
alone. A little group is gathering, from the shell-
holes and trenches appear heads.
We get a stretcher.
Kat shakes his head. "Such a kid--" He repeats it
"Young innocents--
"
Our losses are less than was to be expected--five
killed and eight wounded. It was in fact quite a
short bombardment. Two of our dead lie in the
upturned graves. We merely throw the earth in
on them.
We go back. We trot off silently in single file one
behind the other. The wounded are taken to the
dressing-station. The morning is cloudy. The
bearers make a fuss about numbers and tickets,
the wounded whimper. It begins to rain.
An hour later we reach our lorries and climb in.
There is more room now than there was.
75Erich Maria Remarque
The rain becomes heavier. We take out
waterproof sheets and spread them over our
heads. The rain rattles down, and flows off at the
sides in streams. The lorries bump through the
holes, and we rock to and fro in a half-sleep.
Two men in the front of the lorry have long
forked poles. They watch for telephone wires
which hang crosswise over the road so low that
they might easily pull our heads off. The two
fellows take them at the right moment on their
poles and lift them over behind us. We hear their
call "Mind--wire--," dip the knee in a half-sleep
and straighten up again.
Monotonously the lorries sway, monotonously
come the calls, monotonously falls the rain. It
falls on our heads and on the heads of the dead
up in the line, on the body of the little recruit
with the wound that is so much too big for his
hip; it falls on Kemmerich's grave; it falls in our
hearts.
An explosion sounds somewhere. We wince, our
eyes become tense, our hands are ready to vault
over the side of the lorry into the ditch by the
road.
Nothing happens--only the monotonous cry:
"Mind--wire,"--our knees bend--we are again half
asleep.
76ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
FIVE
Killing each separate louse is a tedious business
when a man has hundreds. The little beasts are
hard and the everlasting cracking with one's
fingernails very soon becomes wearisome. So
Tjaden has rigged up the lid of a boot-polish tin
with a piece of wire over the lighted stump of a
candle. The lice are simply thrown into this little
pan. Crack! and they're done for.
We sit around with our shirts on our knees, our
bodies naked to the warm air and our hands at
work. Haie has a particularly fine brand of louse:
they have a red cross on their heads. He
suggests that he brought them back from the
hospital at Thourhout, where they attended
personally on a surgeon-general. He says he
means to use the fat that slowly accumulates in
the tin-lid for polishing his boots, and roars with
laughter for half an hour at his own joke.
But he gets little response to-day; we are too
preoccupied with another affair.
77Erich Maria Remarque
The rumour has materialised. Himmelstoss has
come. He appeared yesterday; we've already
heard the well-known voice. He seems to have
overdone it with a couple of young recruits on
the ploughed field at home and unknown to him
the son of the local magistrate was watching.
That cooked his goose.
He will get some surprises here. Tjaden has been
meditating for hours what to say to him. Haie
gazes thoughtfully at his great paws and winks
at me. The thrashing was the high water mark of
his life. He tells me he often dreams of it. Kropp
and Müller are amusing themselves. From
somewhere or other, probably the pioneer-cook-
house, Kropp has bagged for himself a mess-tin
full of beans. Müller squints hungrily into it but
checks himself and says "Albert, what would you
do if it were suddenly peace-time again?"
"There won't be any peace-time," says Albert
bluntly.
"Well, but if--" persists Müller, "what would you
do?"
"Clear out of this!" growls Kropp.
"Of course. And then what?"
"Get drunk," says Albert.
"Don't talk rot, I mean seriously--
"
"So do I," says Kropp, "what else should a man
do?"
78ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Kat becomes interested. He levies tribute on
Kropp's tin of beans, swallows some, then
considers for a while and says: "You might get
drunk first, of course, but then you'd take the
next train for home and mother. Peace-time,
man, Albert--
"
He fumbles in his oil-cloth pocket-book for a
photograph and suddenly shows it all round.
"My old woman!" Then he puts it back and
swears: "Damned lousy war--
"
"It's all very well for you to talk," I tell him.
"You've a wife and children."
"True," he nods, "and I have to see to it that
they've something to eat."
We laugh. "They won't lack for that, Kat, you'd
scrounge it from somewhere."
Müller is insatiable and gives himself no peace.
He wakes Haie Westhus out of his dream. "Haie,
what would you do if it was peacetime?"
"Give you a kick in the backside for the way you
talk," I say. "How does it come about exactly?"
"How does the cow-shit come on the roof?"
retorts Müller laconically, and turns to Haie
Westhus again.
It is too much for Haie. He shakes his freckled
head: "You mean when the war's over?"
"Exactly. You've said it."
79Erich Maria Remarque
"Well, there'd be women of course, eh?"--Haie
licks his lips.
"Sure."
"By Jove, yes," says Haie, his face melting, "then
I'd grab some good buxom dame, some real
kitchen wench with plenty to get hold of, you
know, and jump straight into bed. Just you
think, boys, a real featherbed with a spring
mattress; I wouldn't put trousers on again for a
week."
Everyone is silent. The picture is too good. Our
flesh creeps. At last Müller pulls himself together
and says: "And then what?"
A pause. Then Haie explains rather awkwardly:
"If I were a non-com. I'd stay with the Prussians
and serve out my time."
"Haie, you've got a screw loose, surely!" I say.
"Have you ever dug peat?" he retorts good-
naturedly. "You try it."
Then he pulls a spoon out of the top of his boot
and reaches over into Kropp's mess-tin.
"It can't be worse than digging trenches," I
venture.
Haie chews and grins: "It lasts longer though.
And there's no getting out of it either."
"But, man, surely it's better at home."
"Some ways," says he, and with open mouth
sinks into a day-dream.
80ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
You can see what he is thinking. There is the
mean little hut on the moors, the hard work on
the heath from morning till night in the heat, the
miserable pay, the dirty labourer's clothes.
"In the army in peace-time you've nothing to
trouble about," he goes on, "your food's found
every day, or else you kick up a row; you've a
bed, every week clean underwear like a perfect
gent, you do your non-com.'s duty, you have a
good suit of clothes; in the evening you're a free
man and go off to the pub."
Haie is extraordinarily set on his idea. He's in
love with it.
"And when your twelve years are up you get your
pension and become the village bobby, and you
can walk about the whole day."
He's already sweating on it. "And just you think
how you'd be treated. Here a dram, there a pint.
Everybody wants to be well in with a bobby."
"You'll never be a non-com, though, Haie,"
interrupts Kat.
Haie looks at him sadly and is silent. His
thoughts still linger over the clear evenings in
autumn, the Sundays in the heather, the village
bells, the afternoons and evenings with the
servant girls, the fried bacon and barley, the
care-free hours in the ale-house-- He can't part
with all these dreams so abruptly; he merely
growls: "What silly questions you do ask."
81Erich Maria Remarque
He pulls his shirt over his head and buttons up
his tunic.
"What would you do, Tjaden!" asks Kropp.
Tjaden thinks of one thing only. "See to it that
Himmelstoss didn't get past me."
Apparently he would like most to have him in a
cage and sail into him with a club every
morning. To Kropp he says warmly: "If I were in
your place I'd see to it that I became a
lieutenant. Then you could grind him till the
water in his backside boils."
"And you, Detering!" asks Müller like an
inquisitor. He's a born schoolmaster with all his
questions.
Detering is sparing with his words. But on this
subject he speaks. He looks at the sky and says
only the one sentence: "I would go straight on
with the harvesting."
Then he gets up and walks off.
He is worried. His wife has to look after the farm.
They've already taken away two more of his
horses. Every day he reads the papers that
come, to see whether it is raining in his little
corner of Oldenburg. They haven't brought in
the hay yet At this moment Himmelstoss
appears. He comes straight up to our group.
Tjaden's face turns red. He stretches his length
on the grass and shuts his eyes in excitement.
82ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Himmelstoss is a little hesitant, his gait
becomes slower. Then he marches up to us. No
one makes any motion to stand up. Kropp looks
up at him with interest.
He continues to stand in front of us and wait. As
no one says anything he launches a "Well!"
A couple of seconds go by. Apparently
Himmelstoss doesn't quite know what to do. He
would like most to set us all on the run again.
But he seems to have learned already that the
front-line isn't a parade ground. He tries it on
though, and by addressing himself to one
instead of to all of us hopes to get some
response. Kropp is nearest, so he favours him.
"Well, you here too?"
But Albert's no friend of his. "A bit longer than
you, I fancy," he retorts.
The red moustache twitches: "You don't
recognise me any more, what?"
Tjaden now opens his eyes. "I do though."
Himmelstoss turns to him: 'Tjaden, isn't it?"
Tjaden lifts his head. "And do you know what
you are?"
Himmelstoss is disconcerted. "Since when have
we become so familiar? I don't remember that we
ever slept in the gutter together?"
He has no idea what to make of the situation. He
didn't expect this open hostility. But he is on his
83Erich Maria Remarque
guard: he has already had some rot dinned into
him about getting a shot in the back.
The question about the gutter makes Tjaden so
mad that he becomes almost witty: "No you slept
there by yourself."
Himmelstoss begins to boil. But Tjaden gets in
ahead of him. He must bring off his insult:
"Wouldn't you like to know what you are? A dirty
hound, that's what you are. I've been wanting to
tell you that for a long time."
The satisfaction of months shines in his dull
pig's eyes as he spits out: "Dirty hound!"
Himmelstoss lets fly too, now. "What's that, you
muck-rake, you dirty peat-stealer? Stand up
there, bring your heels together when your
superior officer speaks to you."
Tjaden waves him off. "You take a run and jump
at yourself, Himmelstoss."
Himmelstoss is a raging book of army
regulations. The Kaiser couldn't be more
insulted. "Tjaden, I command you, as your
superior officer: Stand up!"
"Anything else you would like?" asks Tjaden.
"Will you obey my order or not?"
Tjaden replies, without knowing it, in the well-
known classical phrase.
At the same time he ventilates his backside.
84ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
"I'll have you court-martialled," storms
Himmelstoss.
We watch him disappear in the direction of the
Orderly Room. Haie and Tjaden burst into a
regular peat-digger's bellow. Haie laughs so
much that he dislocates his jaw, and suddenly
stands there helpless with his mouth wide open.
Albert has to put it back again by giving it a
blow with his fist.
Kat is troubled: "If he reports you, it'll be pretty
serious."
"Do you think he will?" asks Tjaden.
"Sure to," I say.
"The least you'll get will be five days close
arrest," says Kat.
That doesn't worry Tjaden. "Five days clink are
five days rest."
"And if they send you to the Fortress?" urges the
thoroughgoing Müller.
"Well, for the time being the war will be over so
far as I am concerned."
Tjaden is a cheerful soul. There aren't any
worries for him. He goes off with Haie and Leer
so that they won't find him in the first flush of
excitement.
Müller hasn't finished yet. He tackles Kropp
again.
85Erich Maria Remarque
"Albert, if you were really at home now, what
would you do?"
Kropp is contented now and more
accommodating: "How many of us were there in
the class exactly?"
We count up: out of twenty, seven are dead, four
wounded, one in a mad-house. That makes
twelve.
"Three of them are lieutenants," says Müller. "Do
you think they would still let Kantorek sit on
them?"
We guess not: we wouldn't let ourselves be sat
on for that matter.
"What do you mean by the three-fold theme in
"William Tell'?" says Kropp reminiscently, and
roars with laughter.
"What was the purpose of the Poetic League of
GÃ¶ttingen?" asked Müller suddenly and
earnestly.
"How many children had Charles the Bald?" I
interrupt gently.
"You'll never make anything of your life,
BÃ¤umer," croaks Müller.
"When was the battle of Zana?" Kropp wants to
know.
"You lack the studious mind, Kropp, sit down,
three minus--" I say.
86ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
"What offices did Lycurgus consider the most
important for the state?" asks Müller, pretending
to take off his pince-nez.
"Does it go: 'We Germans fear God and none else
in the whole world,' or 'We, the Germans, fear
God and--' " I submit.
"How many inhabitants has Melbourne?" asks
Müller.
"How do you expect to succeed in life if you don't
know that?" I ask Albert hotly.
Which he caps with: "What is meant by
Cohesion?"
We remember mighty little of all that rubbish.
Anyway, it has never been the slightest use to
us. At school nobody ever taught us how to light
a cigarette in a storm of rain, nor how a fire
could be made with wet wood--nor that it is best
to stick a bayonet in the belly because there it
doesn't get jammed, as it does in the ribs.
Müller says thoughtfully: "What's the use? We'll
have to go back and sit on the forms again."
I consider that out of the question. "We might
take a special exam."
"That needs preparation. And if you do get
through, what then? A student's life isn't any
better. If you have no money, you have to work
like the devil."
"It's a bit better. But it's rot all the same,
everything they teach you."
87Erich Maria Remarque
Kropp supports me: "How can a man take all
that stuff seriously when he's once been out
here?"
"Still you must have an occupation of some
sort," insists Müller, as though he were
Kantorek himself.
Albert cleans his nails with a knife. We are
surprised at this delicacy. But it is merely
pensiveness. He puts the knife away and
continues: "That's just it. Kat and Detering and
Haie will go back to their jobs because they had
them already. Himmelstoss too. But we never
had any. How will we ever get used to one after
this, here?"--he makes a gesture toward the
front.
"What we'll want is a private income, and then
we'll be able to live by ourselves in a wood," I
say, but at once feel ashamed of this absurd
idea.
"But what will really happen when we go back?"
wonders Müller, and even he is troubled.
Kropp gives a shrug. "I don't know. Let's get
back first, then we'll find out."
We are all utterly at a loss. "What could we do?"
I ask.
"I don't want to do anything," replies Kropp
wearily. "You'll be dead one day, so what does it
matter? I don't think we'll ever go back."
88ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
"When I think about it, Albert," I say after a
while rolling over on my back, "when I hear the
word 'peace-time,' it goes to my head: and if it
really came, I think I would do some
unimaginable thing--something, you know, that
it's worth having lain here in the muck for. But I
can't even imagine anything. All I do know is
that this business about professions and studies
and salaries and so on--it makes me sick, it is
and always was disgusting. I don't see anything
at all, Albert."
All at once everything seems to me confused and
hopeless.
Kropp feels it too. "It will go pretty hard with us
all. But nobody at home seems to worry much
about it. Two years of shells and bombs--a man
won't peel that off as easy as a sock."
We agree that it's the same for everyone; not
only for us here, but everywhere, for everyone
who is of our age; to some more, and to others
less. It is the common fate of our generation.
Albert expresses it: "The war has ruined us for
everything."
He is right. We are not youth any longer. We
don't want to take the world by storm. We are
fleeing. We fly from ourselves. From our life. We
were eighteen and had begun to love life and the
world; and we had to shoot it to pieces. The first
bomb, the first explosion, burst in our hearts.
We are cut off from activity, from striving, from
89Erich Maria Remarque
progress. We believe in such things no longer,
we believe in the war.
The Orderly Room shows signs of life.
Himmelstoss seems to have stirred them up. At
the head of the column trots the fat sergeant-
major. It is queer that almost all of the regular
sergeant-majors are fat.
Himmelstoss follows him, thirsting for
vengeance. His boots gleam in the sun.
We get up.
"Where's Tjaden?" the sergeant puffs.
No one knows, of course. Himmelstoss glowers
at us wrathfully. "You know very well. You won't
say, that's the fact of the matter. Out with it!"
Fatty looks round enquiringly; but Tjaden is not
to be seen. He tries another way.
"Tjaden will report at the Orderly Room in ten
minutes."
Then he steams off with Himmelstoss in his
wake.
"I have a feeling that next time we go up wiring
I'll be letting a bundle of wire fall on
Himmelstoss's leg," hints Kropp.
"We'll have quite a lot of jokes with him," laughs
Müller-- That is our sole ambition: to knock the
conceit out of a postman.
I go into the hut and put Tjaden wise. He
disappears.
90ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
Then we change our possy and lie down again to
play cards. We know how to do that: to play
cards, to swear, and to fight. Not much for
twenty years;--and yet too much for twenty
years.
Half an hour later Himmelstoss is back again.
Nobody pays any attention to him. He asks for
Tjaden. We shrug our shoulders.
"Then you'd better find him," he persists.
"Haven't you been to look for him?"
Kropp lies back on the grass and says: "Have
you ever been out here before?"
"That's none of your business," retorts
Himmelstoss. "I expect an answer."
"Very good," says Kropp, getting up. "See up
there where those little white clouds are. Those
are anti-aircraft. We were over there yesterday.
Five dead and eight wounded. And that's a mere
nothing. Next time, when you go up with us,
before they die the fellows will come up to you,
click their heels, and ask stiffly: 'Please may I
go? Please may I hop it? We've been waiting here
a long time for someone like you.'"
He sits down again and Himmelstoss disappears
like a comet.
"Three days C. B.," conjectures Kat.
"Next time I'll let fly," I say to Albert.
But that is the end. The case comes up for trial
in the evening. In the Orderly Room sits our
91Erich Maria Remarque
Lieutenant, Bertink, and calls us in one after
another.
I have to appear as a witness and explain the
reason of Tjaden's insubordination.
The story of the bed-wetting makes an
impression. Himmelstoss is recalled and I repeat
my statement.
"Is that right?" Bertink asks Himmelstoss.
He tries to evade the question, but in the end
has to confess, for Kropp tells the same story.
"Why didn't someone report the matter, then?"
asks Bertink.
We are silent: he must know himself how much
use it is in reporting such things. It isn't usual
to make complaints in the army. He
understands it all right though, and lectures
Himmelstoss, making it plain to him that the
front isn't a parade-ground. Then comes
Tjaden's turn, he gets a long sermon and three
days' open arrest. Bertink gives Kropp a wink
and one day's open arrest. "It can't be helped,"
he says to him regretfully. He is a decent fellow.
Open arrest is quite pleasant. The clink was
once a fowl-house; there we can visit the
prisoners, we know how to manage it. Close
arrest would have meant the cellar.
They used to tie us to a tree, but that is
forbidden now. In many ways we are treated
quite like men.
92ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
An hour later after Tjaden and Kropp are settled
in behind their wire-netting we make our way
into them. Tjaden greets us crowing. Then we
play skat far into the night. Tjaden wins of
course, the lucky wretch.
When we break it up Kat says to me: "What do
you say to some roast goose?"
"Not bad," I agree.
We climb up on a munition-wagon. The ride
costs us two cigarettes. Kat has marked the spot
exactly. The shed belongs to a regimental
headquarters. I agree to get the goose and
receive my instructions. The out-house is behind
the wall and the door shuts with just a peg.
Kat hoists me up. I rest my foot in his hands
and climb over the wall.
Kat keeps watch below.
I wait a few moments to accustom my eyes to
the darkness. Then I recognise the shed. Softly I
steal across, lift the peg, pull it out and open the
door.
I distinguish two white patches. Two geese,
that's bad: if I grab one the other will cackle.
Well, both of them--if I'm quick, it can be done.
I make a jump. I catch hold of one and the next
instant the second. Like a madman I bash their
heads against the wall to stun them. But I
haven't quite enough weight. The beasts cackle
and strike out with their feet and wings. I fight
93Erich Maria Remarque
desperately, but Lord! what a kick a goose has!
They struggle and I stagger about. In the dark
these white patches are terrifying. My arms have
grown
wings and I'm almost afraid of going up into the
sky, as though I held a couple of captive
balloons in my fists.
Then the row begins; one of them gets his breath
and goes off like an alarm clock. Before I can do
anything, something comes in from outside; I
feel a blow, lie outstretched on the floor, and
hear awful growls. A dog. I steal a glance to the
side, he makes a snap at my throat. I lie still and
tuck my chin into my collar.
It's a bull dog. After an eternity he withdraws his
head and sits down beside me. But if I make the
least movement he growls. I consider. The only
thing to do is to get hold of my small revolver,
and that too before anyone arrives. Inch by inch
I move my hand toward it.
I have the feeling that it lasts an hour. The
slightest movement and then an awful growl; I
lie still, then try again. When at last I have the
revolver my hand starts to tremble. I press it
against the ground and say over to myself: Jerk
the revolver up, fire before he has a chance to
grab, and then jump up.
Slowly I take a deep breath and become calmer.
Then I hold my breath, whip up the revolver, it
cracks, the dog leaps howling to one side, I make
94ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT
for the door of the shed and fall head over heels
over one of the scuttering geese.
At full speed I seize it again, and with a swing
toss it over the wall and clamber up. No sooner
am I on top than the dog is up again as lively as
ever and springs at me. Quickly I let myself
drop. Ten paces away stands Kat with the goose
under his arm. As soon as he sees me we run.
At last we can take a breather. The goose is
dead, Kat saw to that in a moment. We intend to
roast it at once so that nobody will be any wiser.
I fetch a dixie and wood from the hut and we
crawl into a small deserted lean-to which we use
for such purposes. The single window space is
heavily curtained. There is a sort of hearth, an
iron plate set on some bricks. We kindle a fire.
Kat plucks and cleans the goose. We put the
feathers carefully to one side. We intend to make
two cushions out of them with the inscription:
"Sleep soft under shell-fire." The sound of the
gunfire from the front penetrates into our refuge.
The glow of the fire lights up our faces, shadows
dance on the wall. Sometimes a heavy crash and
the lean-to shivers. Aeroplane bombs. Once we
hear a stifled cry. A hut must have been hit.
Aeroplanes drone; the

