"Geralt looked out of the palace window for the last time. Dusk was falling
rapidly. Beyond the lake the distant lights of Wyzim twinkled. There was a
wilderness around the old palace—a strip of no-man's land with which, over
seven years, the town had cut itself off from this dangerous place, leaving
nothing but a few ruins, rotten beams and the remains of a gap-toothed
palisade which had obviously not been worth dismantling and moving. As
far away as possible—at the opposite end of the settlement—the king had
built his new residence. The stout tower of his new palace loomed black in
the distance, against the darkening blue of the sky.
In one of the empty, plundered chambers, the witcher returned to the
dusty table at which he was preparing, calmly and meticulously. He knew
he had plenty of time. The striga would not leave her crypt before midnight.
On the table in front of him he had a small chest with metal fittings. He
opened it. Inside, packed tightly in compartments lined with dried grass,
stood small vials of dark glass. The witcher removed three.
From the floor, he picked up an oblong packet thickly wrapped in sheep's
skins and fastened with a leather strap. He unwrapped it and pulled out a
sword with an elaborate hilt, in a black, shiny scabbard covered with rows
of runic signs and symbols. He drew the blade, which lit up with a pure
shine of mirror-like brightness. It was pure silver.
Geralt whispered an incantation and drank, one after the other, the
contents of two vials, placing his left hand on the blade of the sword after

each sip. Then, wrapping himself tightly in his black coat, he sat down on
the floor. There were no chairs in the chamber, or in the rest of the palace.
He sat motionless, his eyes closed. His breathing, at first even, suddenly
quickened, became rasping and tense. And then stopped completely. The
mixture which helped the witcher gain full control of his body was chiefly
made up of veratrum, stramonium, hawthorn and spurge. The other
ingredients had no name in any human language. For anyone who was not,
like Geralt, inured to it from childhood, it would have been lethal poison.
The witcher turned his head abruptly. In the silence his hearing,
sharpened beyond measure, easily picked out a rustle of footsteps through
the courtyard overgrown with stinging nettles. It could not be the striga. The
steps were too light. Geralt threw his sword across his back, hid his bundle
in the hearth of the ruined chimney-place and, silent as a bat, ran
downstairs.
It was still light enough in the courtyard for the approaching man to see
the witcher's face. The man, Ostrit, backed away abruptly; an involuntary
grimace of terror and repulsion contorted his lips. The witcher smiled wryly
—he knew what he looked like. After drinking a mixture of banewart,
monk's hood and eyebright the face takes on the color of chalk, and the
pupils fill the entire iris. But the mixture enables one to see in the deepest
darkness, and this is what Geralt wanted.
Ostrit quickly regained control.
“You look as if you were already a corpse, witcher,” he said. “From fear,
no doubt. Don't be afraid. I bring you reprieve.”
The witcher did not reply.
“Don't you hear what I say, you Rivian charlatan? You're saved. And
rich.” Ostrit hefted a sizeable purse in his hand and threw it at Geralt's feet.
“A thousand orens. Take it, get on your horse and get out of here!”
The Rivian still said nothing.
“Don't gawp at me!” Ostrit raised his voice. “And don't waste my time. I
have no intention of standing here until midnight. Don't you understand? I
do not wish you to undo the spell. No, you haven't guessed. I am not in
league with Velerad and Segelin. I don't want you to kill her. You are simply
to leave. Everything is to stay as it is.”
The witcher did not move. He did not want the magnate to realize how
fast his movements and reactions now were. It was quickly growing dark. A
relief, as even the semi-darkness of dusk was too bright for his dilated
pupils.
“And why, sir, is everything to remain as it is?” he asked, trying to
enunciate each word slowly.
“Now, that”—Ostrit raised his head proudly—“should really be of damn
little concern to you.”
“And what if I already know?”
“Go on.”
“It will be easier to remove Foltest from the throne if the striga frightens
the people even more? If the royal madness completely disgusts both
magnates and common folk, am I right? I came here by way of Redania and
Novigrad. There is much talk there that there are those in"