





King Charles III





William, Prince of Wales





Charles III(King-in-Council)





Starmer ministry (L)


Keir Starmer (L)


David Lammy (L)


(King-in-Parliament)



Charles III








The Lord Reed of Allermuir


Lord Sales


Andrew Bailey


Monetary Policy Committee





The diplomatic foreign relations of the United Kingdom are conducted by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, headed by the foreign secretary. The prime minister and numerous other agencies play a role in setting policy, and many institutions and businesses have a voice and a role.


The United Kingdom was the world's foremost power during the 19th and early 20th centuries, most notably during the so-called "Pax Britannica"—a period of unrivaled supremacy and unprecedented international peace during the mid-to-late 1800s. The country continued to be widely considered a superpower until the Suez crisis of 1956 and the dismantling of the British Empire left the UK's dominant role in global affairs to be gradually diminished. Nevertheless, the United Kingdom remains a great power and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The UK is a founding member of AUKUS, the Commonwealth, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the G7, the G20, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, additionally the UK is a member of CPTPP. The UK was also a founding member state of the European Union, however due to the outcome of a 2016 membership referendum, proceedings to withdraw from the EU began in 2017 and concluded when the UK formally left the EU on 31 January 2020, and the transition period on 31 December 2020 with an EU trade agreement. Since the vote and the conclusion of trade talks with the EU, policymakers have begun pursuing new trade agreements with other global partners.


History

Following the formation of the Kingdom of Great Britain (which united England and Scotland) in 1707, British foreign relations largely continued those of the Kingdom of England. British foreign policy initially focused on achieving a balance of power within Europe, with no one country achieving dominance over the affairs of the continent. This policy remained a major justification for Britain's wars against Napoleon, and for British involvement in the First and Second World Wars. Secondly Britain continued the expansion of its colonial "First British Empire" by migration and investment.


France was the chief enemy until the defeat of Napoleon in 1815. It had a much larger population and a more powerful army, but a weaker navy. The British were generally successful in their many wars. The notable exception, the American War of Independence (1775–1783), saw Britain, without any major allies, defeated by the American colonials who had the support of France, the Netherlands and (indirectly) Spain. A favoured British diplomatic strategy involved subsidising the armies of continental allies (such as Prussia), thereby turning London's enormous financial power to military advantage. Britain relied heavily on its Royal Navy for security, seeking to keep it the most powerful fleet afloat, eventually with a full complement of bases across the globe. British dominance of the seas was vital to the formation and maintaining of the British Empire, which was achieved through the support of a navy larger than the next two largest navies combined, prior to 1920. The British generally stood alone until the early 20th century, when it became friendly with the US and made alliances with Japan, France and Russia and Germany former antagonist now ally.


1814–1914

The 100 years were generally peaceful—a sort of Pax Britannica enforced by the Royal Navy.  There were two important wars, both limited in scope. The Crimean War (1853–1856) saw the defeat of Russia and its threat to the Ottoman Empire. The Second Boer War (1899–1902) saw the defeat of the two Boer republics in South Africa and Boxer Rebellion happen the same year. London became the world's financial centre, and commercial enterprise expanded across the globe. The "Second British Empire" was built with a base in Asia (especially India) and Africa.


First World War

1920s

After 1918 Britain was a "troubled giant" that was less of a dominant diplomatic force in the 1920s than before. It often had to give way to the United States, which frequently exercised its financial superiority.  The main themes of British foreign policy included a leading role at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919–1920, where Lloyd George worked hard to moderate French demands for revenge on Germany. He was partly successful, but Britain soon had to moderate French policy toward Germany further, as in the Locarno Treaties of 1925.  Furthermore, Britain obtained "mandates" that allowed it and its dominions to govern most of the former German and Ottoman colonies.


Britain became an active member of the new League of Nations, but its list of major achievements was slight.


Disarmament was high on the agenda, and Britain played a major role following the United States in the Washington Naval Conference of 1921 in working toward naval disarmament of the major powers.  By 1933 disarmament agreements had collapsed and the issue became rearming for a war against Germany.


Britain was partially successful in negotiating better terms with United States regarding the large war loans which Britain was obliged to repay. Britain supported the international solution to German reparations through the Dawes Plan and the Young Plan. After the Dawes Plan had helped stabilize Germany's currency and lowered its annual payments, Germany was able to pay its annual reparations using money borrowed from New York banks, and Britain used the money received to pay Washington. The Great Depression starting in 1929 put enormous pressure on the British economy. Britain revived Imperial Preference, which meant low tariffs within the British Empire and higher barriers to trade with outside countries. The flow of money from New York dried up, and the system of reparations and payment of debt died in 1931.


In domestic British politics, the emerging Labour Party had a distinctive and suspicious foreign policy based on pacifism. Its leaders believed that peace was impossible because of capitalism, secret diplomacy, and the trade in armaments. Labour stressed material factors that ignored the psychological memories of the Great War and the highly emotional tensions regarding nationalism and the boundaries of countries.  Nevertheless, party leader Ramsay MacDonald devoted much of his attention to European policies.


1930s

Vivid memories of the horrors and deaths of the First World War inclined many Britons—and their leaders in all parties—to pacifism in the interwar era. This led directly to the appeasement of dictators (notably of Mussolini and of Hitler) in order to avoid their threats of war.


The challenge came from those dictators, first from Benito Mussolini, Duce of Italy, then from Adolf Hitler, Führer of a much more powerful Nazi Germany. The League of Nations proved disappointing to its supporters; it failed to resolve any of the threats posed by the dictators. British policy involved "appeasing" them in the hopes they would be satiated. By 1938 it was clear that war was looming, and that Germany had the world's most powerful military. The final act of appeasement came when Britain and France sacrificed Czechoslovakia to Hitler's demands at the Munich Agreement of September 1938. Instead of satiation, Hitler menaced Poland, and at last Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain dropped appeasement and stood firm in promising to defend Poland (31 March 1939). Hitler however cut a deal with Joseph Stalin to divide Eastern Europe (23 August 1939); when Germany did invade Poland in September 1939, Britain and France declared war, and the British Commonwealth followed London's lead.


Second World War

Having signed the Anglo-Polish military alliance in August 1939, Britain and France declared war against Germany in September 1939 in response to Germany's invasion of Poland. This declaration included the Crown colonies and India, which Britain directly controlled. The dominions were independent in foreign policy, though all quickly entered the war against Germany. After the French defeat in June 1940, Britain and its empire stood alone in combat against Germany, until June 1941. The United States gave diplomatic, financial and material support, starting in 1940, especially through Lend Lease, which began in 1941 and attain full strength during 1943. In August 1941, Churchill and Roosevelt met and agreed on the Atlantic Charter, which proclaimed "the rights of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they live" should be respected. This wording was ambiguous and would be interpreted differently by the British, Americans, and nationalist movements.


Starting in December 1941, Japan overran British possessions in Asia, including Hong Kong, Malaya, and especially the key base at Singapore. Japan then marched into Burma, headed toward India. Churchill's reaction to the entry of the United States into the war was that Britain was now assured of victory and the future of the empire was safe, but the rapid defeats irreversibly harmed Britain's standing and prestige as an imperial power. The realisation that Britain could not defend them pushed Australia and New Zealand into permanent close ties with the United States.


Postwar

Economically in dire straits in 1945 (saddled with debt and dealing with widespread destruction of its infrastructure), Britain systematically reduced its overseas commitments. It pursued an alternate role as an active participant in the Cold War against communism, especially as a founding member of NATO in 1949.


The British had built up a very large worldwide Empire, which peaked in size in 1922, after more than half a century of unchallenged global supremacy. The cumulative costs of fighting two world wars, however, placed a heavy burden upon the home economy, and after 1945 the British Empire rapidly began to disintegrate, with all the major colonies gaining independence. By the mid-to-late 1950s, the UK's status as a superpower was gone in the face of the United States and the Soviet Union. Most former colonies joined the "Commonwealth of Nations", an organisation of fully independent nations now with equal status to the UK. However it attempted no major collective policies. The last major colony, Hong Kong, was handed over to China in 1997. Fourteen British Overseas Territories maintain a constitutional link to the UK, but are not part of the country per se.


Britain slashed its involvements in the Middle East after the humiliating Suez Crisis of 1956. However Britain did forge close military ties with the United States, France, and Germany, through the NATO military alliance. After years of debate (and rebuffs), Britain joined the Common Market in 1973; which became the European Union in 1993. However it did not merge financially, and kept the pound separate from the Euro, which partly isolated it from the Euro area crisis. In June 2016, the UK voted to leave the EU.


21st century




Foreign policy initiatives of UK governments since the 1990s have included military intervention in conflicts and for peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance programmes and increased aid spending, support for establishment of the International Criminal Court, debt relief for developing countries, prioritisation of initiatives to address climate change, and promotion of free trade. The British approach has been described as "spread the right norms and sustain NATO".


Lunn et al. (2008) argue:


The GREAT campaign of 2012 was one of the most ambitious national promotion efforts ever undertaken by any major nation. It was scheduled take maximum advantage of the worldwide attention to the Summer Olympics in London. The goals were to make British more culture visible in order to stimulate trade, investment and tourism. The government partnered with key leaders in culture, business, diplomacy and education. The campaign unified many themes and targets, including business meetings; scholarly conventions; recreational vehicle dealers; parks and campgrounds; convention and visitors bureaus; hotels; bed and breakfast inns; casinos; and hotels.


In 2013, the government of David Cameron described its approach to foreign policy by saying:


The UK began establishing air and naval facilities in the Persian Gulf, located in the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Oman in 2014–15. The Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 highlighted a range of foreign policy initiatives of the UK government. Edward Longinotti notes how current British defence policy is grappling with how to accommodate two major commitments, to Europe and to an ‘east of Suez’ global military strategy, within a modest defence budget that can only fund one. He points out that Britain's December 2014 agreement to open a permanent naval base in Bahrain underlines its gradual re-commitment east of Suez. By some measures, Britain remains the second most powerful country in the world by virtue of its soft power and "logistical capability to deploy, support and sustain  forces overseas in large numbers." Although commentators have questioned the need for global power projection, the concept of “Global Britain” put forward by the Conservative government in 2019 signalled more military activity in the Middle East and Pacific, outside of NATO's traditional sphere of influence.


At the end of January 2020, the United Kingdom left the European Union, with a subsequent trade agreement with the EU in effect from 1 January 2021, setting out the terms of the UK-EU economic relationship and what abilities the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office can use in foreign relations related to trade.


Diplomatic relations

British diplomatic relations date back to the 13th century. The United Kingdom has established diplomatic relations with all United Nations members, aside from Bhutan, in addition to 2 Non-UN member states: Holy See, and Kosovo. Moreover, the UK established official relations with the Sovereign Military Order of Malta on 9 October 2024. The following table lists the date from which diplomatic relations were established with other countries:


Bilateral relations

Africa

The UK established diplomatic relations with Algeria in 1962.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Tax Convention, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Angola on 14 October 1977.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a High Level Prosperity Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Benin on 6 October 1960, then known as Dahomey.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Botswana on 30 September 1966.


The UK governed Botswana from 1885 to 1966, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the SACUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Tax Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Burkina Faso on 6 October 1960, then known as Upper Volta.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Burundi on 1 July 1962.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Cameroon on 1 February 1960.


The UK governed western Cameroon from 1916 to 1961, when it joined the Federal Republic of Cameroon.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Cape Verde on 17 May 1977.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Central African Republic on 9 December 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Chad on 9 December 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Comoros on 3 October 1977.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Eastern and Southern Africa–UK Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 7 July 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Djibouti on 25 January 1978.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Egypt on 19 December 1914.


The UK governed Egypt from 1882 to 1956, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Association Agreement, a Development Partnership, and a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Equatorial Guinea on 20 June 1969.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, and the United Nations.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Eritrea on 16 November 1993.


The UK governed Eritrea from 1941 to 1952, when Eritrea united with Ethiopia into a federation.


Both countries share common membership of  the United Nations.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Eswatini on 6 September 1968.


The UK governed Eswatini from 1903 to 1968, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the SACUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Tax Convention, an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Ethiopia in 1841.


The UK governed Ethiopia from 1941 to 1942. The UK continued to governed the regions of Ogaden and Haud from 1941, until both territories were relinquished to Ethiopia in 1948 and 1955 respectively.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Gabon on 9 December 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Gambia on 1 January 1965.


The UK governed the Gambia from 1816 to 1965, when The Gambia achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Ghana on 6 March 1957.


The UK governed Ghana from 1821 to 1957, when Ghana achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, an Interim Trade Partnership Agreement, a High Level Prosperity Partnership, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Guinea on 28 May 1959.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Guinea-Bissau on 12 March 1975.


The UK governed parts of Guinea-Bissau from 1792 to 1870, when it was ceded to Portugal.


Both countries share common membership of Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Ivory Coast on 12 October 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Economic Partnership Agreement, a High Level Prosperity Partnership, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Kenya in 1963.


The UK governed Kenya from 1895 to 1963, when Kenya achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Economic Partnership Agreement, a Defence Cooperation Agreement, a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Lesotho on 4 October 1966.


The UK governed Lesotho from 1868 to 1966, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the SACUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement.  Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Liberia on 1 August 1849.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership. and a Tax Information Exchange Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Libya on 24 December 1951.


The UK governed Libya from 1942 to 1951, when Libya gained full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and have signed an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Madagascar on 27 June 1960.


The UK governed Madagascar from 1942 to 1943, when Madagascar was transferred to France.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Eastern and Southern Africa–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Malawi on 6 July 1964.


The UK governed Malawi from 1893 until 1964, when Malawi gained full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Mali on 22 March 1961.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Mauritania on 28 November 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Mauritius on 12 March 1968.


The UK governed Mauritius from 1810 to 1968, when Mauritius achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Eastern and Southern Africa–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Tax Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Morocco on 28 June 1956.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Association Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Mozambique on 27 August 1975.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Southern Africa Customs Union and Mozambique–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a High Level Prosperity Partnership, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Namibia in 1990.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the SACUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Niger on 6 October 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Nigeria on 1 October 1960.


The UK governed Nigeria from 1862 to 1960, when Nigeria achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement, an Enhanced Trade and Investment Partnership, an Investment Agreement, and a Security and Defence Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Republic of the Congo on 9 December 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic co-operation pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Rwanda on 1 July 1962.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with São Tomé and Príncipe on 3 December 1979.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic co-operation pact, and the United Nations.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Senegal on 20 June 1960.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Defence Cooperation Agreement, a Double Tax Convention, an Investment Agreement, and a Technical Cooperation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Seychelles on 29 June 1976.


The UK governed Seychelles from 1811 to 1968, when Seychelles achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Eastern and Southern Africa–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Economic Security Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Sierra Leone in April 1961.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic co-operation pact, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Somalia on 7 July 1960.


The UK governed Somaliland from 1884 to 1940 and 1941–1960, Somaliland achieved full independence on 26 June 1960. The UK also governed the remaining territory of modern Somalia from 1941 to 1950, until it became an Italian Trust Territory. Both of these territories unified on the 1 July 1960 to become Somalia.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK has not established diplomatic relations with Somaliland; the UK does not recognise Somaliland to be a sovereign nation.


The UK governed Somaliland from 1884 to 1940 and 1941–1960, Somaliland achieved full independence on 26 June 1960. The Republic of Somaliland declared independence from Somalia on 18 May 1991.


The UK established diplomatic relations with South Africa on 10 March 1931.


The UK governed South Africa from 1806 until 1931, when South Africa gained full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the G20, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the SACUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with South Sudan on 9 July 2011.


The UK governed South Sudan from 1899 to 1956, when Sudan achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Sudan on 3 March 1956.


The UK governed Sudan from 1899 to 1956, when Sudan achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations and the World Health Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Tanzania on 22 April 1964.


The UK governed Tanganyika from 1916 to 1961, when Tanganyika achieved full independence; the UK governed Zanzibar from 1890 to 1963, when Zanzibar achieved full independence. Both countries unified on 26 April 1964 to become Tanzania.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a High Level Prosperity Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Togo on 27 April 1960.


The UK occupied Togo from 1914 to 1916, when Togo became a French mandate.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic co-operation pact, the Commonwealth, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Tunisia on 19 June 1956.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Association Agreement, a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Uganda on 9 October 1962.


The UK governed Uganda from 1894 to 1962, when Uganda achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Zambia on 17 October 1964.


The UK governed Zambia from 1911 to 1964, when Zambia achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement, an Energy Africa Partnership Agreement, a Green Growth Compact, and have signed an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Zimbabwe on 18 April 1980.


The UK governed Zimbabwe from 1923 to 1980, when Zimbabwe achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Eastern and Southern Africa–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, and have signed an Investment Agreement.


Asia

The UK established diplomatic relations with Afghanistan on 22 November 1921. The UK currently recognises the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan government, over the de facto Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan government, as the legal administrator of the country.


The UK governed Afghanistan from 1879–1919, when Afghanistan achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Armenia on 20 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, an Investment Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Azerbaijan on 11 March 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Bahrain on 21 August 1971.


The UK governed Bahrain from 1861 to 1971, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Bahrain–US Comprehensive Security Integration and Prosperity Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement. Both countries are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Bangladesh on 4 February 1972.


The UK governed Bangladesh from 1699 to 1947, when it achieved independence as part of Pakistan.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization.
Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, an Investment Agreement, and an Illegal Migration Returns Agreement.


The UK has not established diplomatic relations with Bhutan; the UK does recognise Bhutan to be a sovereign nation.


Relations between Bhutan and the UK date back to the 18th Century


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Health Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Brunei on 1 January 1984.


The UK governed the Brunei from 1888 to 1984, when Brunei achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, CPTPP, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of the British Indian Ocean Territory as a British Overseas Territory.


The UK has governed the British Indian Ocean Territory since 1814.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Cambodia on 5 May 1952.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China on 17 June 1954.


The UK governed the territories of Hong Kong, from 1841 to 1941 and 1945 to 1997, as well as Weihaiwei from 1898 to 1930.


Both countries share common membership of the G20, the UNSC P5, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, an Investment Agreement, and the Sino-British Joint Declaration.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Georgia on 27 April 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have and an Investment Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.


The UK established modern diplomatic relations with Hong Kong on 1 July 1997.


The UK governed Hong Kong from 1841 to 1941 and 1945 to 1997, when Hong Kong's sovereignty was ceded to the People's Republic of China in 1997.


Both share common membership of the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with India on 14 August 1947.


The UK governed the India from 1858 to 1947, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the G20, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, and a Development Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Indonesia on 27 December 1949.


Both countries share common membership of the G20, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement, an Investment Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Iran on 5 June 1807.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Air Transport Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Iraq on 4 October 1932.


The UK governed Iraq from 1921 until 1932, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Israel in 1950.


The UK governed Israel from 1921 until 1948, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the OECD, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Trade and Partnership Agreement, a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership. The two countries are currently negotiating a new Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Japan on 26 August 1858.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the CPTPP, the G7, the G20, the International Criminal Court, OECD, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, a Double Taxation Convention, and a Reciprocal Access Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Jordan on 17 June 1946.


The UK governed Jordan from 1921 until 1946, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Association Agreement, a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Kazakhstan on 19 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, an Investment Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Kuwait on 8 November 1961.


The UK governed Kuwait from 1899 to 1961, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have signed an Investment Agreement. The UK and the Gulf Cooperation Council, of which Kuwait is a member, are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Kyrgyzstan on 12 June 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Laos on 5 September 1955.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Lebanon on 9 February 1942.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Association Agreement, and a Development Partnership.


The UK established modern diplomatic relations with Macao on 20 December 1999.


Both share common membership of the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Malaysia on 31 August 1957.


The UK governed the Malaysia from 1826 to 1942 and 1945 to 1957, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, CPTPP, the Five Power Defence Arrangements, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Maldives on 26 July 1965.


The UK governed the Maldives from 1796 to 1965, when the Maldives achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Both countries are currently negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Mongolia on 23 January 1963.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Air Services Agreement, a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Myanmar on 7 July 1947.


The UK governed Myanmar from 1824 to 1942 and 1945 to 1948, when Myanmar achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Nepal on 4 March 1816.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with North Korea on 12 December 2000.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Oman on 21 May 1971.


The UK governed Oman from 1891 until 1951, when Oman achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Comprehensive Agreement on Enduring Friendship and Bilateral Cooperation, a Double Taxation Agreement, an Investment Agreement, and a Mutual Defence Agreement. Both countries are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Pakistan on 14 August 1947.


The UK governed Pakistan from 1824 to 1947, when Pakistan achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK has not established diplomatic relations with Palestine; the UK does recognise Palestine to be a sovereign nation.


The UK governed Palestine from 1921 until 1948, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, and the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a Political, Trade and Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Philippines on 4 July 1946.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Qatar on 24 May 1972.


The UK governed Qatar from 1916 to 1971, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Climate Technology Partnership, a Security Pact, a Strategic Investment Partnership, and have signed an Investment Agreement. The two countries are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia on 20 May 1927.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Critical Minerals Partnership, a Defence Agreement, a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership. Both countries are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Singapore on 9 August 1965.


The UK governed the Singapore from 1819 to 1942 and 1946 to 1963, when Singapore achieved independence within Malaysia.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, CPTPP, the Five Power Defence Arrangements, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Digital Economy Agreement, a Double Taxation Agreement, a Free Trade Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with South Korea on 18 January 1949.


Both countries share common membership of the G20, the International Criminal Court, the OECD, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, the Downing Street Accord, and a Trade Agreement. The two countries are negotiating a new Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Sri Lanka on 22 October 1946.


The UK governed Sri Lanka from 1802 to 1948, until it achieved full independence as Ceylon.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK re-established diplomatic relations with Syria on 5 July 2025.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership.


The UK has not established formal diplomatic relations with Taiwan; the UK does not recognise Taiwan to be a sovereign nation.


In 1950, the UK switched its recognition from the Republic of China (ROC) to the People's Republic of China (PRC).


Both countries share common membership of the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Tajikistan on 15 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Thailand on 18 April 1855.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Timor-Leste in 2002.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Turkey on 2 September 1924.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the G20, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, an Investment Agreement, and a Trade Agreement. Both countries are negotiating a new Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Turkmenistan on 23 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the United Arab Emirates on 6 December 1971.


The UK governed the United Arab Emirates from 1920 to 1971, when the United Arab Emirates achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Defence Cooperation Accord, an Investment Agreement, and a Partnership for the Future. Both countries are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Uzbekistan on 18 February 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the OSCE, and the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement,  and a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Vietnam on 11 September 1973.


Both countries share common membership of CPTPP, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, a Double Taxation Agreement, a Free Trade Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Yemen on 24 October 1951.


The UK governed the Yemen from 1837 to 1967, when it achieved full independence as South Yemen.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and an Investment Agreement.


Europe

The UK established diplomatic relations with Albania on 9 November 1921.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, an Investment Agreement, a Partnership, Trade and Cooperation Agreement, a Readmission Agreement, and an Agreement on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Andorra on 9 March 1994.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Austria on 8 November 1919.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Belarus on 27 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the OSCE, and the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Belgium on 1 December 1830.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Classified Information Protection Agreement, a Double Taxation Convention, and a Maritime Cooperation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina on 13 April 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the OSCE. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, an Investment Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Bulgaria on 23 July 1879.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Croatia on 24 June 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Cyprus on 1 October 1960. The UK is a "guarantor power" of Cyprus's independence.


The UK governed Cyprus from 1878 until 1960, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Commonwealth, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Czech Republic on 26 October 1918.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Denmark on 25 October 1401.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Voting Participation Agreement.


The UK re-established diplomatic relations with Estonia on 5 September 1991.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, OECD, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Defence Cooperation Agreement, and a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK was a founding member of the European Union on 1 November 1993; it seceded on 1 January 2021.


Both the EU and the UK share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the G7, the G20, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK maintains relations with the Faroe Islands through its relations with Denmark.


The UK occupied Faroe Islands from 1940 until 1945, when the Faroe Islands were returned to Denmark.


Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Finland on 28 March 1919.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, OECD, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a mutual defence agreement, and a strategic partnership agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with France in 1396.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the G7, the G20, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have the Combined Joint Expeditionary Force, a Double Taxation Convention, the Lancaster House Treaties, and Maritime Boundary Agreements in the   Caribbean and the Pacific.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Federal Republic of Germany on 20 June 1951.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the G7, the G20, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.  Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and the Kensington Treaty.


The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of Gibraltar as a British Overseas Territory.


The UK has governed Gibraltar since 1704.


Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Greece on in 1834.


The UK governed the Ionian Islands from 1815 to 1864, when they were ceded to Greece.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OECD, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Defence and Security Agreement, a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Strategic Bilateral Framework.


The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of Guernsey as a Crown Dependency.


The UK has governed Guernsey since 1204.


Both countries share common membership of the Crown Dependencies Customs Union. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Holy See on 16 January 1982.


Both countries share common membership of the OSCE.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Hungary on 22 May 1921.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Iceland on 8 May 1940.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Coalition of the Willing, Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, Joint Expeditionary Force, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OECD, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Ireland on 6 December 1922.


The UK governed Ireland from the 12th century until 1922 in which the Republic of Ireland achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic co-operation pact, the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Common Travel Area, and the Good Friday Agreement. The two countries have a sovereignty dispute over the Rockall Bank.


The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of the Isle of Man as a Crown Dependency.


The UK has governed the Isle of Man since 1399.


Both countries share common membership of the Crown Dependencies Customs Union. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Italy on 13 April 1859.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, G7, G20, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Export and Investment Partnership, and a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of Jersey as a Crown Dependency.


The UK has governed the Jersey since 1204.


Both countries share common membership of the Crown Dependencies Customs Union. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Kosovo on 18 February 2008.


Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement, a Partnership, Trade and Cooperation Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK re-established diplomatic relations with Latvia on 5 September 1991.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Licehtenstein on 6 February 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, a Free Trade Agreement, a Separation Agreement, a Social Security Coordination Convention, and a Trade Agreement.


The UK re-established diplomatic relations with Lithuania on 4 September 1991.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Luxembourg on 8 June 1891.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Malta on 7 September 1964.


The UK governed Malta from 1800 until 1964, when it achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Bilateral Cooperation Framework, and a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Moldova on 17 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Double Taxation Convention, and a Strategic Partnership, Trade and Cooperation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Monaco on 21 September 2007.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the OSCE, and the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Tax Information Exchange Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Montenegro on 13 June 2006.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Netherlands on 1 April 1603.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with North Macedonia on 16 December 1993.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Partnership, Trade and Cooperation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Norway on 6 November 1905.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Free Trade Agreement, a Green Partnership, and a Strategic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Poland on 15 July 1919.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OECD, OSCE, Trilateral Security Pact, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Defence and Security Agreement, a Double Tax Convention, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Portugal on 9 May 1386.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance, and a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Romania on 20 February 1880.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Defence Cooperation Agreement, and a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Russia on 24 August 1553.


In March 2022, the United Kingdom was added to Russia's unfriendly countries list.


Both countries share common membership of the European Court of Human Rights, G20, the OSCE, the UNSC P5 and the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with San Marino on 18 November 1998.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and a Tax Information Exchange Agreement.


The UK established full diplomatic relations with Serbia on 7 February 1870.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, OSCE and the United Nations. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, an Investment Agreement, a Partnership, Trade and Cooperation Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Slovakia on 1 January 1993.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Slovenia on 15 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established official relations with Sovereign Military Order of Malta on 9 October 2024.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Spain in 1505.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Sweden on 23 December 1653.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, the Joint Expeditionary Force, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, a Mutual Defence Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Switzerland in 1891.


Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, the International Criminal Court, OECD, OSCE, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have the Berne Financial Services Agreement, a Double Taxation Convention, and a Trade Agreement. The two countries are currently negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Ukraine on 10 January 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, the OSCE, a Trilateral Security Pact, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, a Digital Trade Agreement, a Double Tax Convention, a Security Agreement, and a Political, Free Trade and Strategic Partnership Agreement.


North America

The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of Anguilla as a British Overseas Territory.


The UK has governed Anguilla since 1650.


Bilaterally the two countries have a Tax Information Exchange Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Antigua and Barbuda on 1 November 1981. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Antigua and Barbuda from 1632 to 1981, when Antigua and Barbuda achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Bahamas on 10 July 1973. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed the Bahamas from 1648 to 1973, when the Bahamas achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Tax Information Exchange Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Barbados on 30 November 1966.


The UK governed Barbados from 1625 to 1966, when Barbados achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Belize on 21 September 1981. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Belize from 1783 to 1981, when Belize achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Defence Cooperation Agreement, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Canada on 1 July 1926. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Canada from 1783 to 1931, when Canada achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Coalition of the Willing, the Commonwealth, CPTPP, Five Eyes, the G7, the G20, the International Criminal Court, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the UKUSA Agreement, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and a Trade Continuity Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Costa Rica on 28 February 1848.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the OECD, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Central America–UK Association Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Cuba on 20 May 1902.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement, and a Political Dialogue and Co-operation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Dominica on 13 December 1978.


The UK governed Dominica from 1763 to 1978, when Dominica achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Tax Information Exchange Agreement, an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Domican Republic on 6 March 1850.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Maritime Boundary Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with El Salvador in 1883.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Central America–UK Association Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK maintains relations with Greenland through its relations with Denmark.


Bilaterally the two countries are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations Grenada on 7 February 1974. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Grenada from 1762 until 1974, when Grenada achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Guatemala on 12 July 1837.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Central America–UK Association Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Haiti on 13 May 1859.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Honduras on 16 June 1849.


The UK governed the Mosquito Coast from 1638 to 1787 and 1816 to 1819.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Central America–UK Association Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Jamaica on 2 August 1962.  Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Jamaica from 1655 to 1962, when Jamaica achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Mexico on 26 December 1826.


Both countries share common membership of CPTPP, the G20, the International Criminal Court, the OECD, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, an Investment Agreement, and a Trade Continuity Agreement. Additionally the two countries are negotiating a Free Trade Agreement.


The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of Montserrat as a British Overseas Territory.


The UK has governed Montserrat since 1632.


Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Arrangement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Nicaragua on 18 January 1859.


The UK governed the Mosquito Coast from 1638 to 1787 and 1816 to 1819.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Central America–UK Association Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Panama on 9 April 1908.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Central America–United Kingdom Association Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK maintains relations with Puerto Rico through its relations with the United States.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Saint Kitts and Nevis on 19 September 1983. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Saint Kitts and Nevis from the 17th century to 1983, when Saint Kitts and Nevis achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Saint Lucia in 1979. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Saint Lucia from 1803 to 1979, when Saint Lucia achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, and the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on 27 October 1979. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as part of the Windward Islands colony from 1833 to 1979, when Saint Vincent and the Grenadines achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, and the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Trinidad and Tobago on 31 August 1962.


The UK governed Trinidad and Tobago from 1797 to 1962, when Trinidad and Tobago achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, and the CARIFORUM–UK Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention,


The UK established diplomatic relations with the United States on 1 June 1785. UK–US diplomatic relations is commonly described as the "Special Relationship".


The UK governed the United States from 1585 to 1783, when the United States achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, AUKUS, Five Eyes, the G7, the G20, NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, the UKUSA Agreement, the UNSC P5, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilateral the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, an Economic Prosperity Deal, and a Mutual Defence Agreement.


Oceania

The UK established diplomatic relations with Australia in March 1936. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Australia from the late 18th century until 1942, when Australia achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of AUKUS, the Coalition of the Willing, the Commonwealth, CPTPP, Five Eyes, the Five Power Defence Arrangements, the G20, the International Criminal Court, OECD, the UKUSA Agreement, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Climate and Energy Partnership, Defence Agreement, a Double Taxation Agreement, a Free Trade Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK has not established diplomatic relations with the Cook Islands; the UK does not recognise the Cook Islands to be a sovereign nation.


The UK governed the Cook Islands from 1888 until 1901, when the Cook Islands were transferred to New Zealand.


Both countries share common membership of the World Health Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Federated States of Micronesia on 31 August 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Health Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Fiji on 10 October 1970.


The UK governed Fiji from 1874 until 1970, when Fiji achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Pacific States–United Kingdom Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Kiribati on 12 July 1979.


The UK governed Kiribati from 1892 until 1979, when Kiribati achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Marshall Islands on 2 February 1992.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Tax Information Exchange Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Nauru on 1 December 1977.


The UK officially governed Nauru jointly with Australia and New Zealand from 1914 until 1968, when Nauru achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with New Zealand in March 1939. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed New Zealand from 1840 until 1947, when New Zealand achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Coalition of the Willing, the Commonwealth, CPTPP, Five Eyes, the Five Power Defence Arrangements, the International Criminal Court, OECD, the UKUSA Agreement, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have Free Trade Agreement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK has not established diplomatic relations with Niue; the UK does not recognise Niue to be a sovereign nation.


The UK governed Niue from 1900 until 1901, when Niue was transferred to New Zealand.


Both countries share common membership of the World Health Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Palau on 16 August 1996.


Both countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Health Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Papua New Guinea on 16 September 1975. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed Papua New Guinea from 1884 until 1906, when the territory was transferred to Australia.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Pacific States–United Kingdom Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, an Investment Agreement, and a Security Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Samoa in September 1970.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Pacific States–United Kingdom Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with the Solomon Islands on 7 July 1978. Both countries are Commonwealth Realms.


The UK governed the Solomon Islands from 1893 until 1978, when the Solomon Islands achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, the World Health Organization,  and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Pacific States–United Kingdom Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Tonga on 4 June 1970.


The UK governed Tonga from 1900 until 1970, when Tonga achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Tuvalu on 1 October 1978.


The UK governed Tuvalu from 1892 until 1978, when Tuvalu achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, and the World Health Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Arrangement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Vanuatu on 30 July 1980.


The UK governed Vanuatu from 1887 until 1980, when Vanuatu achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Commonwealth, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have signed an Investment Agreement.


South America

The UK established diplomatic relations with Argentina on 2 February 1825.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Bolivia on 29 September 1840.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Brazil on 17 August 1827.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic co-operation pact, the G20, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Chile on 14 September 1823.


Both countries share common membership of CPTPP, the International Criminal Court, OECD, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Association Agreement, and a Double Taxation Convention.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Colombia on 18 April 1825.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the OECD, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Andean Countries–UK Free Trade Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries havea Cultural Agreement, a Double Taxation Agreement, an Investment Agreement, a Partnership for Sustainable Growth, and a Security Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Ecuador on 29 January 1853.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Andean Countries–UK Trade Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Agreement.


The UK is responsible for the foreign relations of the Falkland Islands as a British Overseas Territory.


The UK has governed the Falkland Islands since 1833.


Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Arrangement, and a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Guyana on the 26 May 1966.


The UK governed Guyana from 1803 to 1966, when Guyana achieved full independence.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Caribbean Development Bank, the Commonwealth, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–United Kingdom Economic Partnership Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Paraguay on 4 March 1853.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Peru on 10 October 1823.


Both countries are members of CPTPP, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the Andean Countries–UK Free Trade Agreement. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Suriname on 31 March 1976.


England governed Suriname from 1650 to 1667, when Suriname was ceded to the Netherlands. The UK occupied Suriname from 1799 until 1816.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the Caribbean Development Bank, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization, as well as the CARIFORUM–United Kingdom Economic Partnership Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Uruguay on 21 February 1833.


Both countries share common membership of the Atlantic Co-operation Pact, the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Double Taxation Convention, and an Investment Agreement.


The UK established diplomatic relations with Venezuela on 29 October 1834.


Both countries share common membership of the International Criminal Court, the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have an Investment Agreement.


Sovereignty disputes



List of territorial disputes involving the United Kingdom:


The United Kingdom claims the area between 20°W and 80°W as a British Overseas Territory. The area between 25°W and 53°W overlaps Argentina's claim. The area between 74°W and 80°W overlaps Chile's claim. The area between 53°W and 74°W overlaps the claims of both Argentina and Chile.


The United Kingdom de facto administers the archipelago as the British Indian Ocean Territory. Mauritius claims the islands. On 22 May 2025, Mauritius and the United Kingdom signed a deal to hand sovereignty over to Mauritius; the dispute will end once the deal is ratified by both parties.


The United Kingdom de facto governs Gibraltar as a British Overseas Territory. Spain claims Gibraltar, disputing the interpretation of the Treaty of Utrecht, as well as the location of the border. Gibraltarians voted overwhelmingly to remain under British sovereignty in 1967 and 2002.


The United Kingdom de facto governs the Falkland Islands as a British Overseas Territory. Argentina claims the Islands as part of its Province of Tierra del Fuego, Antarctica and South Atlantic Islands province. In 1982, the dispute escalated when Argentina invaded the islands during the Falklands War. In 2013, the Falkland Islanders voted overwhelmingly to remain a British Overseas Territory.


Rockall is an uninhabited islet located within the exclusive economic zone of the UK. Ireland, Denmark, Iceland, and the UK have all made submissions to the commission set up under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).


The United Kingdom de facto governs South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands as a British Overseas Territory. Argentina claims the Islands as part of its Province of Tierra del Fuego, Antarctica and South Atlantic Islands province. In 1982, the dispute escalated when Argentina invaded South Georgia during the Falklands War.


Commonwealth of Nations

The UK has varied relationships with the countries that make up the Commonwealth of Nations which originated from the British Empire. Charles III of the United Kingdom is Head of the Commonwealth and is King of 15 of its 56 member states. Those that retain the King as head of state are called Commonwealth realms. Over time several countries have been suspended from the Commonwealth for various reasons. Zimbabwe was suspended because of the authoritarian rule of its President.


International organisations

The United Kingdom is a member of the following international organisations:


See also

References

Bibliography

Primary sources







American singer Michael Jackson is widely regarded as one of the most culturally significant figures of the 20th century. Often considered the greatest entertainer of all time, Jackson broke racial barriers in the United States and profoundly influenced the evolution of pop music, earning him the title of "King of Pop". He is one of the best-selling music artists in history, having sold over 500 million records worldwide. His unparalleled success spans multiple decades, with numerous albums that rank amongst the best-selling of all time, such as Off the Wall (1979), Thriller (1982), Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991), and HIStory - PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE - BOOK I (1995); Thriller remains the best-selling album in history. Guinness World Records named him the most successful entertainer of all time. His achievements in the 1980s helped desegregation of popular music in the United States and introduced an era of multiculturalism globally. Through his dance, fashion and redefinition of music videos, Jackson proliferated visual performance for musical artists. Credited for influencing hundreds of musicians, his songs are among the most covered and sampled in music history. His influence extended to inspiring a vast array of trends and raising awareness for social causes around the world; as a result, Jackson is widely seen as one of the most famous figures in history. Before he died, Jackson was received by over 30 world leaders. Jackson's global brand resulted in celebrity products and commemorations such as video games, documentaries, and monuments.


Popularity of Michael Jackson began as a child star in the 1960s, his introduction as the lead singer of the Jackson 5, a band formed with his older brothers. The group was recognized by U.S. Congress for their contribution to American youth culture, and Jackson was embraced by the American public to a degree not afforded a child star since the height of Shirley Temple in the 1930s. In the early 1980s, Jackson became a dominant figure in popular culture and the first African-American entertainer to have a strong crossover fanbase on music television. As he became a rising solo star, his music videos, including those for "Beat It", "Billie Jean", and "Thriller" from his album Thriller (1982), are credited with breaking several racial barriers both in the United States and worldwide, transforming the medium into an art form and promotional tool. The popularity of these videos helped bring the television channel MTV to fame. Prior to Thriller, timely layoffs were occurring for radio and music record companies, who both suffered during a four year unemployment high between 1978 and 1982 due to the early 1980s recession. Jackson's world record sales and achievements are credited with revolutionizing the music industry by initiating marketing plans on blockbuster albums with an emphasis on video presentation focus going forward.


Further development through his videos and live performances, Jackson popularized street dance moves, particularly his signature move the moonwalk, patented the anti-gravity lean and attracted a cult of impersonators throughout the world. He is credited with helping to spread dance to a global audience and having an authority comparable to dance icons such as to Fred Astaire and Sammy Davis Jr. With an aesthetic borrowed from the musical film tradition, the Thriller videos created a sub-industry of choreographers as other pop artists deliberately sought to produce sophisticated dance-oriented promotional films and concerts for music on an unprecedented scale. In the latter half of the 1980s, Jackson's personal idiosyncrasies and changing appearance became the source of fascination for the tabloid media, a phenomenon furthered by the child abuse accusations leveled against him in 1993. These eccentricities and controversies created major debate, both from comedic and critical perspectives alike. As his last two albums focused more on social commentary, he matchingly pioneered charitable causes as a philanthropist, putting his wealth into several hospitals and nonprofits in various countries. His philanthropy has been described as having set a standard for celebrity charity.


Jackson influenced a wide range of subjects, from celebrity studies, music and dance production to visual culture to gender and sexuality studies, and many more including ones not directly related to his profession. Various life events inspired further discussion while many cultural films, televisions, books reference or depict Jackson on a global scale to present day. According to a study published in The Journal of Pan African Studies in 2010, his influence extended to academia, with references to the singer in literature concerning mass communications, psychology, medicine, engineering and chemistry. He inspired a wealth of products exploring his public image, some of which have been displayed, examined or auctioned; an example being reinterpretation by leading artists in the 2018 exhibition Michael Jackson: On the Wall at London's National Portrait Gallery. The British Council named Jackson on their list of "80 Moments that Shaped the World" with regard to international cultural relations. Since Jackson's death, there have been many tribute shows performed by fans in concert, Cirque du Soleil or Broadway theatre which garnered millions of tickets worldwide.


Performing arts

Music

As the lead singer and youngest member of the Jackson 5 from the late 1960s, Michael Jackson was the group's focal point for the media. They became one of the most popular family acts in pop music, with many hit records, a self-titled cartoon series and, from 1976, a self-titled variety show. He and his brothers were widely viewed as role models for contemporary society; the press celebrated them as a family founded on core religious beliefs and a strong work ethic, and in 1972 the Jackson 5 received a commendation from U.S. Congress in recognition of the brothers' contribution to American youth culture. Amid this recognition, according to the editors of Rolling Stone's Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll, Jackson captivated the nation on a level not seen in a child star since Shirley Temple in the 1930s.





In the description of author and pop culture critic Joseph Vogel, Jackson's album Thriller (1982) changed the direction of popular music. Jay Cocks, writing for Time magazine in 1984, said the album was "a thorough restoration of confidence, a rejuvenation  its effect on listeners, especially younger ones, was nearer to a revelation". It reintroduced black music to mainstream American radio; until then the so-called "restrictive special-format programming", a genre-driven radio content philosophy which segregated music by race introduced in the mid-1970s, limited airplay of black music. Jackson, whose success was compared to that of Elvis Presley and the Beatles, appeared on the cover of Time. The album established Jackson as the world's top entertainment star and, in Stanley's recollection, "you'd expect to see a copy in the corner of any room, in any town, in any country in the world." Its unprecedented commercial success also provided the model for record companies recovering from the economic downturn of the late 1970s, whereby they focused on promoting a blockbuster album at the expense of releases by their lesser-known acts. Amid his description of the cultural phenomenon that Jackson represented in 1984, Cocks deemed him "A one-man rescue team for the music business ... A singer who cuts across all boundaries of taste and style, and color too." In 2008, the Library of Congress added Thriller to the National Recording Registry for its "stratospheric national and international success".


Jackson's music has been extensively covered by other artists of various styles, including Mariah Carey, Miles Davis, Willie Nelson and Alien Ant Farm. Artists who often mention Jackson in their music include Kanye West, Lil Wayne, LL Cool J, Rick Ross and Drake. According to Edmondson, writing in 2013, Jackson "redefined the term pop star" and his cultural legacy is reflected "in the very landscape of the modern, genre-crossing, multimedia pop music scene".


Dance and choreography

From the start of his performing career, Jackson incorporated dance moves into a stage presence that invited comparison with James Brown, Sammy Davis Jr., Mick Jagger and Tina Turner. He went on to popularize street dances such as popping, locking, the robot, and his signature move, the moonwalk. Professor of performance studies at NYU Tavia Nyongo said that "No dancer has done as much to popularize the art form since Fred Astaire."


Jackson first performed the moonwalk when miming to "Billie Jean" at the close of the Motown 25 television special, which aired in May 1983. The performance was viewed by an international audience of around 50 million and, according to Rolling Stone, "energize the music scene once again and set in motion all the forces that would go on to shape the popular culture of the 1980s". Media studies academic Jaap Kooijman writes that, although the moonwalk was an additional element in his routine at Motown 25, Jackson's replication of his dancing from the already popular "Billie Jean" music video presented a new phenomenon whereby a concert performance involved re-creating a video sequence and the music, including live vocals, ceded to visual imagery such as dance.


Jackson is credited with helping to spread dance to a global audience. Nigel Lythgoe, executive producer and judge on the TV dance competition So You Think You Can Dance, said that "countless" applicants had begun dancing because of Jackson. Ronni Favors, a director at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, said Jackson was "a trailblazer for his generation", setting the expectation that future pop stars, such as Britney Spears and Beyoncé, integrate dance in their performances. In Japan, as a result of him opening his Bad World Tour there, Jackson is credited with reshaping J-pop's choreography. He also influenced India's Bollywood film scene, where dance sequences, films and soundtrack music all borrowed heavily from Jackson's work.


Following the singer's death in 2009, Andy Gill of The Independent said that through Jackson's example, "the Eighties became the decade of dance stars like Prince and Madonna, neither of whom would have been able to establish themselves as quickly as they did had Jackson not moonwalked across the room and kicked down the door for them." Gill added that with thousands of dancers imitating his moves in the moonwalk and the zombie, Jackson became "the most significant mainstream dance icon since the mid-century heyday of Fred Astaire, Gene Kelly and Sammy Davis Jr." Jackson was posthumously inducted into the National Museum of Dance and Hall of Fame in 2010.


Music videos

Jackson had a lasting influence on the music video medium, starting with the clips for his Thriller singles "Billie Jean" and "Beat It". At the time most music videos had small budgets, low production values and little narrative. Jackson's videos began a transformation, replacing low-budget montage promos with elaborate short films consisting of in-depth narratives and sophisticated visuals, and taking the form of a mini musical. Jackson collaborated with several Hollywood directors on these works, including John Landis, Martin Scorsese, Spike Lee, David Fincher and John Singleton. "Beat It" featured unusually sophisticated choreography and, according to The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll, created a "music video subindustry of dancers and choreographers" such as Paula Abdul and Toni Basil.


The "Thriller" video—which gained a commercial release as Michael Jackson's Thriller—was unusually long (at 14 minutes) and took the form of a short film presentation. It features Jackson dancing with zombies and cost more than $1 million to produce. The film sealed MTV's position as a cultural force, helped disassemble racial barriers for black artists, revolutionized music video production, popularized the making-of documentaries, and drove rentals and sales of VHS tapes. It has been described as the most influential music video in history; according to Edmondson, the "Thriller" video "is credited with single-handedly revolutionizing the landscape of pop music". Former MTV executive Nina Blackwood said, " we saw videos get more sophisticated—more story lines, way more intricate choreography. You look at those early videos and they were shockingly bad." Music video director Brian Grant credited "Thriller" as the turning point when music videos became a "proper industry". Gill recognized the Landis-directed film as a work that "altered forever the balance of sound and vision in the entertainment industry", adding: "Prior to Jackson, music alone had been the premier conduit of cultural dissemination among young people; after Jackson, it was merely the accompaniment to a dance routine, one small element in a larger spectacle." In December 2009, the video was inducted into the National Film Registry. "Thriller" has become closely associated with Halloween. The dance is performed in major cities around the world; the largest zombie dance included 12,937 dancers, in Mexico City. A YouTube video of more than 1,500 prisoners performing the dance in the Philippines had attracted 14 million views as of 2010.


Director Guillermo del Toro cites "Thriller" as an early inspiration. He said, ""I realized that the people actually making these monsters were not the men I saw in the old books in lab coats. It's young guys with long hair and rock 'n' roll shirts, who I could relate to."


With MTV's initial broadcast of the film, in December 1983, the debut of a new Jackson video became a major media event. MTV's belated support signaled the end of its rock-only policy and, due to the popularity the film gained for the network, of concerns for its commercial survival. Bob Pittman, MTV's co-founder and CEO, said that "'Thriller' brought people to MTV for the first time, and it made them stay and watch it again and again. Now everybody was into MTV." This development ensured an upswing in the economics of the music industry after its sharp decrease in revenue since the late 1970s and, with the expansion of MTV's reach in 1984, new music stars being created through the video medium as well as established acts such as Bruce Springsteen embracing high-production music videos. The Rolling Stone editors state that Jackson's breakthrough was the "turning point" for MTV, initiating a transformation in which the network "not only revolutionized virtually every aspect of the music business, from promotion to concert tours, but changed the way listeners/viewers related to music and to artists". According to Landis, the "Thriller" video project was the subject of a course at Harvard Business School, although he said this study incorrectly highlighted the role of business and legal professionals rather than Jackson's creative vision.


According to The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll, the $160,000 budget for Jackson's "Beat It" video was considered an "exorbitant" amount; the video for his 1995 single "Scream" cost an estimated $4 million, making it the most expensive clip in pop music history at that time. MTV's premiere of Jackson's "Black or White" single was broadcast simultaneously in 27 countries on November 14, 1991, and was watched by an estimated 500 million people. As of 2006, this remained the largest audience to view a music video.


Television appearances

Fashion

The Rolling Stone editors describe Jackson as "one of the most intriguing personas (sic) in popular music, at once childlike and obsessed with control" and comment on his ubiquitous presence, "spotlit in his trademark red zippered jacket and white sequined glove". Jackson often asked tailors to make him clothes that defied convention. His defiance led to a notable style that includes sequined gloves, a fedora, red leather jackets, sequined jackets, aviator sunglasses, black high-waisted pants, white socks, and leather penny loafers. Jackson was also interested in British and French royalty and military history from France, especially Napoleon, which resulted in his adoption of regalia and military jackets. His jackets often had a single-colored armband on one sleeve. At the height of his fame, Jackson inspired fashion trends around the world. British Vogue called him "a fashion pioneer  who gave new meaning to moonwalking, immortalised solitary, sparkly gloves, initiated the trophy jacket trend in the Eighties and was brave enough to couple dress with Madonna on the red carpet".


Others have been influenced by Jackson's fashion sense. In 2012, Lady Gaga named Jackson as an inspiration. She owns around 400 pieces from his personal collection. In 2016, she wore Jackson's jacket from his 1990 visit to the White House at Hillary Clinton's final campaign rally during the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Also in 2016, Beyoncé honored Michael Jackson at Super Bowl 50 by wearing a Jackson-inspired outfit, a black and gold military jacket similar to the one Jackson wore in his Super Bowl halftime show in 1993.


Visual arts

Jackson has been depicted by a large number of contemporary artists, including Jeff Koons, Michael Craig-Martin and Grayson Perry. The silkscreen image of Jackson used on the cover of Time in 1984 was created by Andy Warhol. The final portrait Jackson commissioned before his death, by Kehinde Wiley, portrayed him as Philip II of Spain in the manner of a painting by Pieter Paul Rubens.


In June 2018, the National Portrait Gallery in London opened an exhibition titled Michael Jackson: On the Wall, featuring art inspired by Jackson and created by many leading artists. The curators stated that Jackson was "the most depicted cultural figure in visual art". The exhibition included the Warhol and Wiley pieces, and culminated in a 2005 film by Candice Breitz in which 16 young people are shown dancing to "Thriller". Guardian art critic Adrian Searle wrote that the singer's eccentricities and the common characterizations of him as "Ariel of the ghetto", a modern-day Baudelaire and Frankenstein's monster had provided artists with a wealth of imagery to explore in their work, and that as a muse he was "an inspiration, a model, a tragedy". Dick Zimmerman's portrait of Jackson used for Thriller is cited as "the world's largest distributed portrait in history".


Sculptures

Most of statues and sculptures depicting Jackson are monuments dedicated to the music artist located across the world. Notable among them is the statue located in Favela Santa Marta, Rio de Janeiro, whose creation was announced the day after Jackson's death by the mayor of the city, with the intention of dedicating a memorial to the artist. Another significant example is the plaster and resin sculpture of Jackson that stood outside Craven Cottage in Fulham, London, the ground of Fulham Football Club, from 2011 until 2013, which was later moved to the National Football Museum in Manchester. Other countries and territories where statues dedicated to Jackson have been unveiled since his death include Hong Kong, Russia, Italy, Malaysia, India, China and Georgia. Currently, the country with the largest number of statues dedicated to Jackson is China. There are also some statues dating from before Jackson's death, such as the 10-foot sculpture of Jackson by Diana Walczak depicted on the cover of Jackson's album HIStory - PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE - BOOK I, currently located in the lobby of the Mandalay Bay in Paradise, Nevada.


On the other hand, there are other sculptural artworks depicting Jackson that are not monuments, such as the porcelain sculpture Michael Jackson and Bubbles by the American artist Jeff Koons. It was created in 1988 within the framework of Koons's Banality series. Apart from the artist's proof, which is currently on display at The Broad in Los Angeles, three copies were made; one of them was sold at Sotheby's on 15 May 2001, when it was auctioned off to the record price of 5.6 million dollars, and the other two are in the Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art in Oslo and the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, respectively.


Race politics

Early in his career, Jackson and his family were often portrayed in the press as having risen out of black ghetto culture. This stereotype reinforced their standing as role models for American youth but, as a fabrication by Motown's publicity department, it displeased the family. To many African-Americans, his youth and energy were a source of inspiration in the aftermath to Martin Luther King's 1968 assassination, at a time when the country's black-power and civil rights movements were in disarray. Jackson became a notable figure in the desegregation of US popular culture and music. Off the Wall succeeded at a time when disco was perceived as inferior to rock by critics. According to Vogel, one of the album's significant achievements was to integrate a diverse collection of talents from different races, cultures, and countries, and to coalesce them seamlessly into the record.


"Billie Jean" was one of the first music videos by a black artist to be shown on MTV, which hitherto had been a channel directed toward a white, rock-oriented audience. Although the song was already a number one hit on the Billboard charts, MTV initially refused to play the video because of the network's commitment to rock music. When CBS Records executive Walter Yetnikoff threatened to remove all of their products off MTV and expose its discriminatory policies, the network gave in. According to Edmondson, "The video  is often cited as the musical phenomenon that completed the racial integration of popular music begun in the rock 'n' roll era."


The success of Thriller not only broke down racial barriers in music but also in other areas of contemporary society. Critic Greg Tate said, "Black people cherished Thriller's breakthrough as if it were their own battering ram  apartheid." Civil rights activist Al Sharpton commented, "Way before Tiger Woods or Barack Obama, Michael made black people go pop-culture global." He also attributed Obama's presidential win to "a process that Michael helped America graduate to" as crossover fans and imitators grew up to become voters. To some commentators in the 1980s, however, Jackson had betrayed his African-American roots, especially in his musical collaborations with former Beatle Paul McCartney—a point of criticism that Stanley says Jackson sought to address with his album Bad (1987).


The video for "Black or White" showed Jackson dancing with dancers of various ethnic groups and traditions, and the lyrics plead for racial tolerance and understanding. In early 1993, he launched a $1.25 million program to assist children affected by the 1992 Los Angeles riots and, in a TV interview conducted by Oprah Winfrey, discussed issues related to his African-American heritage and the abuse he suffered under his father. The viewer ratings for the show were among the highest in the history of US television.


In 1995, "They Don't Care About Us" was released as one of the singles from HIStory. In the mid-2010s, the track was used as an anthem for the Black Lives Matter movement. Originally recorded as part of the Dangerous sessions, the song was inspired by the Rodney King beating, which had led to the 1992 Los Angeles riots. The lyrics became more personal after Jackson felt dehumanized by the Santa Barbara County police's behavior during the investigation into the child sexual abuse accusations brought against him in 1993.


"They Don't Care About Us" attracted controversy over its supposedly antisemitic lyrics. Bernard Weinraub of The New York Times cited the lines "Jew me, sue me / Everybody do me / Kick me, kike me / Don't you black or white me" as "pointedly critical of Jews". Rabbi Abraham Cooper of the Simon Wiesenthal Center described the lyrics as "deeply disturbing" and potentially harmful to young people. Jackson issued statements saying that his lyrics were about "the pain of prejudice and hate" and that the song was "a way to draw attention to social and political problems". He described himself as "the voice of the accused and the attacked". The lyrics were eventually edited out with muffles.


Global media

Michael Jackson's impact has been well-documented by global media, statistical lists and entertainment outlet op-eds. Google Search using PageRank algorithm includes Michael Jackson among the 100 most Googled terms ever between 2003 to 2022, being one of a few persons to be included on the list along with technology and natural events. Branded titles including but not limited to "The King of Pop", "Biggest Pop Star" factor him as one of the most influential musical artists based on his sales, impact and acclaim. Particular descriptions by economic researchers and cultural journalists have also been detailed in various countries. Such titles, rankings and achievements in both English and non-English languages include:


Historic rankings

English titles

Non-English titles

("Worthy of The Name of King of Pop")


("The Biggest Pop Star of All Time")


(the greatest symbol in the history of pop music)


(He is the idol of idols, the king of kings, and the greatest artist of the 20th century)


("A Boy Wonder Who Becomes the King of Pop")


("The Most Famous Singer in the World")


("The Pioneer in Communicating A Language Everyone Understood")


Public poll or listicle

Impact by country

Regarded as one of the most famous figures in modern history, Jackson had a major impact, both culturally and politically in various countries. Ben Beaumont-Thomas, music editor for The Guardian, said Jackson "ushered in a global culture" and that his impact extended into "areas previously untouched by Western pop culture". In an ethnographic portrait collection on the subculture of his tribute fans, writer Lorena Turner states his "ability to transcend race, gender and a wide range of cultural stigmas". His moniker "King of Pop" is accepted and used in media by other countries. Particularly during tours, Jackson additionally held a foreign affairs role, holding meetings with prime ministers, royalty and presidents as well as part of his concert proceeds funneling to orphanages of the country visited. The Sydney Morning Herald's political editor Peter Hartcher compared his 2009 death a "remarkable moment of worldwide political and popular unity is a reminder of the immensity of American soft power". Over the years, journalists have detailed his unifying ability as a cultural figure:.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 32px}.mw-parser-output .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;margin-top:0}@media(min-width:500px){.mw-parser-output .templatequotecite{padding-left:1.6em}}

The reason Michael mattered — continues to matter — is because he was one of the first truly international stars. Not just transatlantic, not just big in Japan: He was global. The obvious effect was economic. Michael opened markets around the world. It is Michael Jackson selling records — but it is also a stall in Malaysia selling bootlegged Michael Jackson tapes and T-shirts  It is a flea market in South Africa where they sell framed illustrations of Michael Jackson and Jesus.  Last night, impersonators massed in Mexico City. In London, plans for a mob moonwalk this evening. In my neighborhood in New York, Michael wafts out of every car, from every window. In Taiwan, an inordinate number of kids are named "Michael" or "Jackson." Packets of information, traveling the globe.


— Pulitzer Prize-winning Cultural writer Hua Hsu, Michael Jackson: He Was The World

Furthermore, the United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs during the 111th Congress was proposed a resolution to honor Michael Jackson's global humanitarian contributions. The resolution detailed over 40 spearhead efforts of Jackson in the country and abroad which include cancer research, terminally-ill funding, education, immunization grants, anti-racism campaigns and global hunger charities.


United Kingdom

In United Kingdom history, Thriller and Bad are the two highest-selling albums by a male solo artist. Only Jackson and rock band Queen have multiple entries in the top ten. His Bad tour once held London's Wembley Stadium record of 504,000 attendees over seven nights until Taylor Swift was reported to beat the record 36 years later for her eight nights at Wembley for The Eras tour. Reports stated Wembley's ticket demand for Jackson's dates exceeded 1.5 million, enough to fill the 72,000-capacity venue 20 times, though the number of nights were strictly kept as the venue reached their quota length for security maintenance. To date, Jackson holds the record for most sold out events at Wembley with 15 sold out concerts over his career. Comparably in Liverpool at Aintree Racecourse, reported amongst most-attended concerts in history with 125,000 fans, of which 1,550 fans were reported having minor injuries due to uncontrollable crowd, with an estimated 31 to 40 people requiring hospitalization. This was despite Merseyside Police drafting in 500 extra officers and a first aid team for the event, though no deaths were reported. His 2009 This Is It concert residency was to be held exclusively at The O2 Arena in London sold out of 750,000 tickets within 4 hours, to which organizers described to be "a cultural phenomenon".


Germany

During the last four years of the Cold War, Jackson's popularity in Germany was notable in that Jackson's visit to Berlin for his 1988 Bad tour held immense protocols. As the city was physically divided, fans attempted to watch or hear the June 19 concert over the wall, either from behind the Brandenburg Gate area or the nearby Charite hospital. An infamous Stasi file was kept of Jackson, detailing the secret police deemed the visit a possible perceived threat, as an outlet described the police had fear of his potential to inspire and mobilize. Fearing the concert could cause rebellion if Jackson were to make any politically sensitive comments, they methodized censorship. A look-alike during his SAT 1 conference was hired, and a two-minute broadcast delay would be put in place in which they could transfer to a pre-recording. At one point, Jackson famously pointed towards the Wall and declared, "This is for all the fans over there in East Berlin!" to which a PMA journalist expressed, "In the end, Jackson's Berlin Wall concert stands as a testament to the transformative power of art and the enduring human spirit. It's a vivid reminder that even in the darkest of times, a song can light up the night, and a performance can inspire change." German newspaper Der Spiegel called Jackson "Deutschland's King of Pop" for his unique impact on the country's culture.


Africa

Jackson first visited Africa in 1974 with the Jackson 5, a visit that inspired his Bad single "Liberian Girl". Along with Jackson compositions such as "Heal the World" and "We Are the World", fans from Liberia found the song uplifting and his message resonated there in a climate of civil war and human atrocities. By 1992, Jackson carried out a multi-nation African cultural tour to Tunisia, Gabon, Ivory Coast, Senegal, Tanzania, Egypt and South Africa, intent on visiting "orphanages, children's hospitals, churches, schools and playgrounds". Jackson's trip was a huge success as his visit drew more spectators in Gabon than Nelson Mandela and more in the Ivory Coast than the Pope, "From his sunset arrival in Gabon, where more than 100,000 people greeted him with spiritual bedlam". While in Ivory Coast, he was crowned king of the Agni people in the Kingdom of Sanwi. Later that year, he established the Heal the World Foundation to raise awareness of social issues related to children.



Until 1994, with the fall of apartheid in South Africa, Jackson was the only artist whose songs were played on white pop stations and black R&B stations there. According to Metro FM presenter Lupi Ngcayisa, his lyrics "forced black families to debate issues surrounding individualism and race". South African R&B artist Loyiso Bala, of the Bala Brothers, likened Jackson's impact to Mandela and said that as a black boy growing up in a township, "you either wanted to be Michael Jackson or a freedom fighter". NPR's Africa correspondent, Ofeibea Quist-Arcton said:

Africans all across the continent are mourning the loss.  A Kenyan woman, with a tremor in her voice, asked how a legend dared die, because they were not supposed to die.  Across the continent in West Africa, a Nigerian radio host reportedly broke down live on air.  But, mostly, Africans are mourning the man whose dazzling dance steps and musical genius are likely to be Jackson's lasting legacy.

 Michael is said to remain a consistently popular figure in Africa with stories of his fame spread across the continent. In 2016, John Mahama, then President of Ghana, referred to "Heal the World" in a speech at the United Nations General Assembly to encourage globalization and acceptance of refugees, and to denounce xenophobia.


South America


Before the existence of Brazilian music certification in 1990, Jackson is among Brazil's best selling albums by international artists with only Jackson and singer Julio Iglesias holding claimed sales over 2 million. In 1996, Jackson visited Santa Marta in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil to film with director Spike Lee one of the videos for "They Don't Care About Us". It was intended to bringing global attention to the social issues faced by residents of these impoverished communities. Initially, Rio's local government was concerned that Jackson would show the world an unflattering picture of poverty, which might affect tourism, and accused Jackson of exploiting the poor. Others supported Jackson's wish to bring public awareness to problems of the region, arguing that the government was embarrassed by its own failings. A judge banned all filming but this ruling was overturned by an injunction. Jackson performed with the Olodum, which runs an inner-city school for Salvador's underprivileged children centered to build self-esteem and encourage economic ascension. Speaking of the music video in The New Brazilian Cinema, Lúcia Nagib commented:

He used the favela people as extras in a visual super-spectacle . The interesting aspect of Michael Jackson's strategy is the efficiency with which it gives visibility to poverty and social problems in countries like Brazil without resorting to traditional political discourse. The problematic aspect is that it does not entail a real intervention in that poverty.

 In 2009, Billboard described the area as "now a model for social development" and claimed that Jackson's influence was partially responsible for this improvement. Because of his immense popularity, he has received both governmental and fan tributes in Spanish-speaking countries such as Chile, who gave him virtual presidential honors on his 1993 visit to the country Argentina, and Peru. For Spanish fans, he then released the single Todo mi amor eres tú' (You are all my love)." In 2015, a Latin project was released for Michael Jackson, Unity: The Latin Tribute to Michael Jackson.


India

Rock may have smashed the iron curtain, but it was just the moonwalk that did it for India  Michael Jackson was not just a pop star for us; he represented the world beyond India we had only heard about as well as the possibility of catching up with it. Michael Jackson was the first symbol of aspiration for a generation that went from denial to obsession about it almost overnight. In the 1980s, bootleg VHS copies of Thriller went from home to home, even as we sought to work hard and study and buy into the first signs of consumerism that had started to appear. By the 1990s, with economic liberalization and the rise of satellite television channels like MTV India and Channel V, Michael Jackson, his music, image, and charisma all became a part of India, like globalization itself.

— Vamsee Juluri, Professor at University of San Francisco, The Dawn of Global India, Huffington Post

By 1983, Jackson became the representative global music star of India. Culture journalists such as Vamsee Juluri, and Kamla Bhatt have agreed he was a "huge influence on Bollywood and Indian film industry." Billboard noted,

For many people in India — a market where international repertoire accounts for just 5% of physical music sales — Michael Jackson is Western pop. Alone among Western artists, his popularity isn't confined to English-speaking urban Indians. Among the country's rural youth his celebrity competes with Bollywood stars for one reason: his trademark dance moves.

 A country drawing influence from Jackson, several movies have been inspired directly by him or have him as a central theme such as Munna Michael, ABCD: Any Body Can Dance and Donga.


India's entertainment tax was waived by the ruling Shiv Sena just for Jackson to perform in the country. Jackson visited India in 1996 during his History World Tour where he was greeted by thousands of fans with the media noting that his security force larger than that of the Prime Minister. A journalist told Condé Nast Traveler, "These were the days when noise control norms were still lax, and one could hear his music for miles. People were going nuts - they were singing and dancing in the streets." His show in Mumbai was performed in front of a sold out audience of 70,000 in an effort to raise funds to provide jobs for young people in the state of Maharashtra. Upon his arrival, an unprecedented frenzy as 15 km of Bombay's streets were filled with fans hoping to catch a glimpse of Michael Jackson who was escorted to his hotel by a 30-car police motorcade. BBC reported this brew tensions and separations within the Shiv Sena party, as oppositions asked how a Hindu right-wing party could back a pop concert which "represented Western values". Suketu Mehta summed it up, "And well, what is culture? He represents certain values in America which India should not have any qualms in accepting. We should like to accept that part of America that is represented by Jackson." Sony Music Entertainment India stated that millions of Jackson's records had been distributed in the country with Jackson accounting for 26% of all music downloads in India following his death. British-born hip-hop star Hard Kaur explained, "Actors, established choreographers, aspiring composers, kids in dance shows  Go to any village, any corner in India and you'll find everyone is familiar with the name Michael Jackson." Top Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan stated that he was a huge fan of Jackson with Khan later brought Bollywood together two months later in order to pay tribute to Michael Jackson which was televised to Indian audiences.


In 2011, the Bombay High Court opened a case against the 1996 tax waive, which named Raj Thackeray, President of Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS), Wizcraft International and Shiv Sena's employment wing, Shiv Udyog Sena as brainchilds for the event. For ten years, it was transferred to multiple courts including the Supreme Court of India, until 2021 when the Cabinet granted its approval.


Romania

Upon arrival in Romania in 1992 during the Dangerous World Tour, Jackson was greeted by thousands of fans in what was described at the time as "the biggest-ever performance by a Western pop star in the country that until 1989 had been isolated by Ceausescu's Stalinist regime". Likened to that of a head of state official visit, he meet with then President Ion Iliescu at the Royal Palace and proceeded to stop by orphanages prior to his concert in front of 70,000 people at Bucharest. The Seattle Times confirmed that all concert proceeds were to benefit 100,000 orphans housed in squalid state-run institutions. Over 22,000 security officers were assigned to protect Jackson during the proceedings. Mass hysteria exploded after the concert, as approximately a thousand young fans of Jackson protested that Jackson deserved "the Nobel Peace Prize because he did more to help children than any politician". Newspaper România liberă controversially claimed President Iliescu staged his meeting with Jackson during a financial crisis to help him get re-elected, which his foreign minister Adrian Năstase denied. A special live broadcast special of the event was released years later Live in Bucharest: The Dangerous Tour garnering the highest ratings for HBO in the history of the channel up until that point. Years later, a continuous cultural figure in their country, Romanian fans erected a statue for him in Bucharest after his death.


China

According to the list of best-selling physical albums in China, Jackson is the best-selling English musician after The Lion King and Titanic soundtracks in China. MinnPost cited his appeal largely comes from his association with China's Open Door Policy and the reform and opening up, which kicked into gear in the 1980s, after American established diplomatic relations with China the previous year (1979 hegemony versus previously state-controlled radio). Due to his popularity, China currently is the country with the largest number of statues dedicated to Jackson, with 10 statues in cities such as Guangzhou, Chengdu, Nanning, Xi'an, Zhengzhou and Wuhan. He has been referenced or had songs used in many Chinese-language films such as Detective Chinatown 3, Gong Shou Dao, Art College 1994, Old Boys, Police Story, City Hunter and Shaolin Soccer. According to Adam Tsuei, President of Sony Music Entertainment Greater China division, Jackson's sales in Asia have continued to be strong despite rampant piracy. Until today, there are various impersonators scattered across China.


Mexico

Jackson's Thriller holds the all-time record for best-selling album in Mexico, based on Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas. During his 1993 Dangerous World Tour, he gave five concerts at the largest stadium in Latin America, Estadio Azteca in Mexico for 550,000 people, breaking an attendance record for greatest number of fans across a run of shows at the stadium. Through his concert run, he met with former president, Carlos Salinas de Gortari. There is an active fan community in Mexico. On his birth date following his death, 13,000 fans gathered at the Monumento a la Revolución for a Thriller flash mob, which at one point held a Guinness World Record. Mexico's Tourism Secretary Alejandro Rojas released a statement, "We are very happy because the initiative came from the people."


Czech Republic

To celebrate Jackson's HIStory World Tour, a large statue of the singer was erected in Letná Park, the place once occupied by Joseph Stalin. Jackson's airport arrival in Prague, Czech Republic was described by a merchant civilian as equivalent to "Yuri Gagarin returning home after landing on the Moon". Other people climbed on trees and upon the roofs of buildings in effort to get a glimpse of Jackson, whose security force and associates caused multiple traffic jams and took up 5 floors of the InterContinental hotel with a crowd of over 5,000 people blocking the streets waiting to see Jackson from his Hotel suite. Jackson's concert at Prague is one of the largest in history with an estimated 125,000 in attendance and thousands more outside the fences. Before his performance, Jackson was welcomed to Prague Castle for a meeting with President Václav Havel, and toured the capital city as well as children's home in Zbraslav and the traumatology centre in Prague's Motol University Hospital. After his concert, the statue was moved to Eindhoven.


Pakistan

Following his 2009 death, many local television channels in Pakistan shifted their focus to cover the news, temporarily setting aside the ongoing military campaign against Taliban militants. This change in programming highlights the global impact of Jackson whom at the time was regarded "internationally acclaimed" by Pakistan People's Party (PPP) Salim Qureshi Khokhar who asked the House to observe a minute of silence "as he was an Islam". Minister for Local Government Shazia Marri interjected the claims, "Jackson's brother may have been a Muslim but there's no confirmation about Jackson having converted to Islam". Professor of International Relations at Boston University Adil Najam recalled Jackson's cultural relevance in the country, which inspired vast television and music in Pakistan, "There was a time when - irrespective of your economic and social class - the way to be 'tich' was to be like Michael Jackson  And no stage show from Peshawar to Karachi would ever be complete without the 'performance' of a Michael Jackson clone."


Saudi Arabia

Even inside the most conservative families' households. There was just something about him and his songs that rang true. When we were teenagers, we would often smuggle music by MJ into our school in Saudi Arabia and share it among us by putting the cassettes into generic plastic covers to hide the fact that we were listening to his music. There were fears among the religious police about his "influence" on the young mind, particularly as songs such as Bad and Beat It were copied and sung, and even dubbed into Arabic, by the young and the rebellious. We didn't care about his personal life, it didn't matter. What was important were the songs. We identified with the themes of loneliness and rejection in his lyrics. After the first Gulf War, the young in countries such as Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Kuwait listened to his songs for strength and inspiration. I know I did - even if I didn't understand all of the words back then. In many ways - and despite reservations about Washington's recent foreign policy - he was a symbol of America as a land of opportunity, especially for a generation of Arabs that had grown up in conflict.

— Journalist Rym Ghazal, He meant so much to Arabs, The National (Abu Dhabi)

Michael Jackson's influence in Saudi Arabia went beyond just being a pop icon; he became a symbol of cultural transcendence and inspiration for large population of Saudis. In the 1980s, public displays of music and dance were traditionally limited and mostly banned and debunked by the Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, Michael Jackson's music and dance moves provided a unique outlet for self-expression. Despite his music not being openly distributed, fans listened to Jackson's music through illegal pirated copies and bootlegs made on the black market. Notably, Jackson's unique connection with Prince Al Waleed bin Talal Al Saud saw potential in Jackson, and was instrumental in Jackson's continued success and influence in the Middle East. The two formed a short-lived joint venture called Kingdom Entertainment. In recent years, Saudi Arabia has continued to honor Michael Jackson's legacy through various tribute shows and events. For instance, during the Riyadh Season, a major cultural festival in the capital, Jackson's montages were shown on giant screens every hour from 4:30 PM to midnight, a notable testament to his impact on Saudi people.


Other Arabian countries

Egyptians refer to Jackson as a common cultural icon, with camels being after him, and often part of a longer list of films depicting his relevance in the country. Sheikh Jackson in particular is based on the country's emotions stirred by the pop star's death, sparking a series of existential questions within the Sheikh community. In Lebanon, he also caused major mourning tributes, to which Lebanese Minister of Information, Walid al-Daouk, remarked, "I'm attending this just to confirm that Beirut is not just tears in the middle of the streets. Lebanon is culture. It is what we see. It's the joy of living." Years later, They Don't Care About Us single in 2017 was used to protest against the Lebanese government regarding the waste issue which had turned to a health crisis. In the United Arab Emirates, Jackson's visit included several surprise public appearances, which thrilled fans and locals alike, prior to Jackson's visit he was the honored guest of Sheik Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan in Bahrain.


Japan

Indicative of Japan's devotion to Jackson was the hysteria that his visits caused. Japan's music market is second in the world with Jackson being the country's highest certified Western male soloist, even though the majority of the country's sales are not traceable before Japan's music certification RIAJ established in 1989. Defense Minister Yasukazu Hamada has credited him with building a generation with his music. Because of his immense popularity starting in the 1970s, he had several advertising deals with Suzuki's Love Scooter. For the initial leg of his first solo tour 1987's Bad, he told the Associated Press he chose Japan as his first leg of his tour, "I love Japan  It is one of my favorite places in the entire world." Editor Sam Jameson of LA Times released sale measurements, "No singer, foreign or Japanese, has matched that record (at that point). Nearly 400,000 tickets were sold in advance." The 9-show tour expanded to 14 performances in Tokyo, Osaka and Yokohama. His infamous note left at Capitol Hotel Tokyu was reprinted on People magazine's October 1987 release showed his handwriting, "I love every race on planet earth". MTV Video Music Awards Japan anointed him their Legend Award. While visiting for the awards ceremony, he held a Japanese banquet and invited 100 orphans and handicapped children for free.


His passing had a major cultural effect on Japan, with multi-day coverage of various television tributes and news updates. Health Minister Yōichi Masuzoe added, "He was a superstar. It is an extremely tragic loss. But it is fantastic he was able to give so many dreams and so much hope to the people of the world." A part of Japanese culture is doppelganger industry, related to impersonators, with Jackson being a popular choice to emulate.


South Korea

Founders of the first largest K-pop record companies Lee Soo-man (SM Entertainment) and Park Jin-young (JYP Entertainment) have named Michael Jackson's influence in their venture into music, with Park stating his journey in music began particularly when he first heard Jackson's Off the Wall album and Lee's business desire began seeing the "meteoric rise" of Jackson while studying in the states. Jackson has been honored in several shows, thematically reference in songs, and cited as a major influence to the biggest K-pop solo acts in the country such as BoA, Rain, Jay Park, Hyuna, Chung Ha, Yunho, Kim Junsu, Taemin, as well as several idol members from Exo, BTS, Super Junior, NCT, Seventeen, among others. In Seoul, fashion wholesaler Shin Ji-hyun said Jackson was the most popular foreign superstar in the country. Additionally, choreographers such as Lia Kim, Rino Nakasone and Rie Hata have cited him as their main influence.


In late 1996, Jackson performed two nights at Seoul Olympic Stadium to an audience of 100,000. He had spoken positively of the culture in Korea, and had taken a particular liking to Bibimbap. The following year, he began a friendship with President-elect Kim Dae-jung. Jackson, who rarely gets involved with politics, took part in an international video conference supporting Kim's candidacy for the 1997 South Korean presidential election, stating "Korea is a country of warmth, love, sincerity and complete innocence." He attended Kim's inaugural ceremony. Around the same time, Jackson had met a Korean adviser named Myung Ho Lee. Lee would eventually emerged as a central figure in the performer's debt binge. Another former financial adviser Alvin Malnik estimates that some of Jackson's advisers squandered $50 million to $100 million on deals that never panned out. It was eventually settled out of court. In 1999, he held MJ & Friends in Seoul. In the year of his death, tributes formed on television and memorials, with Kim Dae-jung releasing a statement, "Today, we lost a hero and a dear friend of Korea who supported our country's cause for reunification and peace."


Poland

In front of a crowd of over 120,000 people, Michael Jackson performed his concert at the Bemowo airport, which makes it one of the largest concerts of all time and, to date, the biggest concert in Poland's history. Jackson arrived in Poland on September 18, 1996 at Okęcie International Airport and a mini ceremony welcomed by children dressed in traditional Polish attire presented him with bouquets of flowers. As he traveled to his hotel, a police motorcade escorted him, and thousands of fans lined the streets, cheering and waving with excitement. In return, Jackson frequently interacted with them and engaging in playful conversations. Before the concert, Jackson was welcomed to the Presidential Palace where he had a scheduled meeting with then President Aleksander Kwasniewski who welcomed him with his wife Jolanta Kwaśniewska. After a meeting with Warsaw mayor Marcin Święcicki, he visited an orphanage on No. 4 Rakowiecka Street in the north of Mokotów to where chorus children gathered to sing Heal the World. Jackson had a positive experience in Poland, stating he considered to "buy a castle in the beautiful country". By 1997 he met with business partners with plans to open an amusement park; learning at the time there were no major theme parks in the Warsaw area. Kwasniewski released a statement on Jackson, "He was a king, an extraordinary talent but at the same time a very sensitive person". His theme park plan was still in talks years later, though had never came to fruition after the years-long proposal.


Soviet Union/Russia

Less than a decade before the 1991 cessation of the Soviet Union, Western music was particularly banned in the country. In 1984, New York Times confirmed Sovetskaya Kultura's denouncing stance of Thriller, proliferating the news ''The great show-biz swindle  given rise to a kind of euphoria.'' The article also accused Jackson of mesmerizing Americans and keeping them from thinking about political topics, such as violence in Miami or Lebanon, that would make the White House uncomfortable. After the Soviet Union became Russia, publications described Michael Jackson was "perhaps, the focus of all those contradictions between Soviet and later Russian society and the world of Western show business." Prior to his 1993 concert during the Dangerous World Tour, Michael Jackson's first appearance in the Soviet Union actually came during a promotional campaign with the Pepsi Corporation, where Jackson was starred in the first ever American advertisements shown on Soviet television. The TV spots were aired to an estimated 150,000,000 viewers within the Soviet Union making it one of the most watched broadcasts of all time.



A documentary Michael Jackson - Moscow Case 1993: When the King of Pop Met the Soviets detail events after the 1993 Michael Jackson sexual abuse allegations, leading up to his controversial 1993 Dangerous World Tour Moscow, Russia concert, six days before the 1993 Russian constitutional crisis arose. Jackson had been escorted by the Russian police, and met with Moscow's first-standing mayor Yuri Luzhkov. The early morning of the concert, several confusing events were reported: ticket sales stagnated at 50,000 of total 70,000 seats, though the booths had a "sold out" sign and office was closed for further sale. It had been raining and following reports of a bomb threat as well as news Michael's team brought drugs, had police officers stop activities to search the premises, such that intelligence agents dragged a police officer who was found under the stage stairs. No drugs or bomb were found. Some ticketless audience that had gathered around the stadium were allowed entry despite organizers having lost money. As it was an open-air concert, spectators were drenched, and also reportedly drunk.

Indeed, Jackson's ascent to the heights of fame occurred during an era of critical change in the Soviet Union (and all those governments that arose in its place). This era was also life-changing on the question of how Soviet popular culture related to global trends and developments. One can speak of "progress" in this case without any irony.  Indeed, six days later, Boris Yeltsin would issue Decree No. 1400 on the Dissolution of the Supreme Soviet, thus laying the foundation for the bloody events of October 3–4. It was precisely this time that most clearly separated the Soviet period from the history of post-Soviet Russia. And in the fact that the last days of Soviet history culminated in a carnival involving Michael Jackson, one can see some kind of sad irony, not to mention in the fact that the concert actually ended in failure: the stage at Luzhniki Stadium failed to operate at full capacity under the heavy rain, and the public was drenched under the old and still unequipped roof. As a parenthetical note, this concert was one of the last non-sports events that took place before the arena was closed for reconstruction. It was from this point that the "Era of Luzhkov" began.

— Michael Jackson and Contemporary Russian History, Russkiy Mir Foundation

The events in the past months up to September 1993 and the concert greatly impacted Jackson's health and led to the cancellation of the rest of his tour by November. It would also inspire his song "Stranger in Moscow".


Tabloid media

The Michael Jackson cacophony is fascinating in that it is not about Jackson at all. I hope he has the good sense to know it and the good fortune to snatch his life out of the jaws of a carnivorous success. He will not swiftly be forgiven for having turned so many tables, for he damn sure grabbed the brass ring, and the man who broke the bank at Monte Carlo has nothing on Michael. All that noise is about America, as the dishonest custodian of black life and wealth; the blacks, especially males, in America; and the burning, buried American guilt; and sex and sexual roles and sexual panic; money, success, and despair—to all of which may now be added the bitter need to find a head on which to place the crown of Miss America.

— James Baldwin, "Freaks and the American Ideal of Manhood" (1985)

At the height of his fame, during the 1980s, Jackson began to embrace and perpetuate the public perception of his strangeness. Jackson (and his publicity team) and the media worked in tandem to cultivate this image. Early tabloid stories of his being obsessed with the Elephant Man's bones and sleeping in an "oxygen chamber" were possibly publicity stunts. Around this time, the tabloid newspaper The Sun began nicknaming Jackson "Wacko Jacko", a name he came to despise. Other tabloids and media outlets soon followed. The nickname stayed with Jackson for the rest of his career. Stories about him gradually turned negative. In Vogel's description: "Critics maligned him for buying the Beatles catalog , mocked his changing appearance, called him a sissy, questioned whether he actually wrote his songs, reduced his art to commercial ephemera." His marriage to Lisa Marie Presley and rumours of him undergoing skin-whitening and other cosmetic surgery furthered the controversy surrounding Jackson's image and made him the subject of sensationalist biographies.


Writing in British Vogue in 1987, Barney Hoskyns said that Jackson occupied a "superstar stratosphere of his own" and part of the public's misunderstanding of the star was "because we so want to know him – as we want to know anyone that famous". Hoskyns described the tabloid image of Jackson as "despicable ... distortions", but nevertheless opined: "Michael Jackson represents a terrible, pitiful corruption of what a twenty-nine-year-old human being really should be ... His neurotic obsession with perfecting his physical appearance apparently knows no bounds. And his inability to enjoy meaningful relations with anyone except animals, small children and cartoon characters has become ridiculous. This is, in short, a singularly maladjusted young man." The Rolling Stone editors also attribute the media speculation partly to the singer's elusiveness and obsession with privacy, and add: "the massive public soul-searching the  allegations against Jackson inspired were but one indication of the almost inestimable role he has played in shaping not only pop music but pop culture."


Susan Fast, writing for the same publication, gives a more sympathetic view of Jackson: "While some of  difference was demonstrated through what was viewed in the mass media as 'eccentric' behavior  it was really his more substantive(sic), underlying differences that were most troubling—racial, gendered, able-bodied/disabled, child/teenager/adult, adult man who loved children, father/mother." She writes that Jackson's persona was "so unsettling to the hegemonic order that it had to be contained through ridicule, misinterpretation, sensationalism, and finally criminal indictment". It is generally regarded as unusual for a man to want to be a single parent, Fast continues, to adore children like a mother; the thought of a man obsessed with cosmetics and appearance agitated the public to disbelieve the idea of him being an object of heterosexual desire. Fast argues that such perceptions, which stemmed from anxieties of masculinity, despite the fact that he created highly heterosexual art like "Black or White" and "In the Closet"; extended to the public perception of Jackson's alleged child molestation rooted in absence of masculinity.



Scholars have described the widely acknowledged and often polarizing perception of Jackson as a postmodern spectacle, causing the "real Michael Jackson" to remain elusive. In an article for Popular Music & Society, Brian Rossiter commented:

The media, aware of the marketable potential of Jackson's ambiguities, consistently used them to manufacture the notion of an authentic or private self behind his public persona.  Audiences were always given liberty to select which Michael Jackson they deemed to be the real or authentic one .

Influence on other performers

Rolling Stone narrates, "Trying to trace Michael Jackson's influence on the pop stars that followed him is like trying to trace the influence of oxygen and gravity. So vast, far-reaching and was his impact". Jackson's use of diverse genres extended his reach from singers, to rappers, composers, and DJs such as David Guetta and Mark Ronson who studied and reinterpreted his work. As gathered on WhoSampled, Jackson's music has been officially covered, remixed or sampled a combined estimate of 4,380 times (not including unverified releases) by other artists; which is among the top ten most reinterpreted music artists in modern history. Over the years, hundreds of artists have specifically cite Michael Jackson as being their early inspiration, or reference him in their creative process, or as a specified influence:


Earliest inspiration

Major soloists have spoken of Michael Jackson's pivotal effect on their dream of becoming a singer or as an early inspiration:


Michael and I would tape every old musical, and we made a collage. All the dance numbers, we put them all on one tape and we used to just watch them and watch them. He was Fred Astaire, i was Ginger Rogers, and we'd learn every routine. Our mirror was the reflection off the window  Seeing all the things that he's accomplished, and saying okay I've got to keep growing, I've got to keep pushing forward, move on, on and upward.  And I think he's the greatest there is.

My brother Steve, who was a few years older than me, had Bad on tape and I remember listening to Smooth Criminal and just thinking it was the coolest thing ever. I must have been five or six at the time and I remember walking around school by myself thinking I was Michael Jackson. I wasn't dancing, exactly – more like walking musically. It seemed like a good idea at the time.

It was after watching a Michael Jackson concert on tape when I was around six or seven. He had a certain magic about him, seeing how many people were having a great time in the crowd, it was like they had no worries, they were just so overjoyed to be celebrating together in the one space. To child-me, it looked like there were millions of people in the audience, and they were so emotional – people bursting into tears, or passing out – the passion he exuded in every move.  So I was like, 'I wanna do that!'.

Specific creative methods

Various musicians have referenced Michael Jackson for specific creative methods.


As a singer, the way that you would breathe, people kind of dip down their breaths, when it comes down to their vocal take, I love the way he incorporates it. The breaths are just as important as the vocal melody.  Michael Jackson's collection of words that don't exist in the English language or perhaps any language apart from Michael Jackson's own special dictionary. Words like shamone, I have no idea what shamone means but what's great about that is it leaves a door wide open for people like myself to also make up entirely nonsensical words and create even whole songs about them!

Just how much he was involved with every music video, every photo shoot, every production. I didn't know any of that. I've been watching recently because I'm like, 'Am I doing too much stuff?' I'm involved in every little thing you see (in my career). I looked it up because I was like, 'Am I alone?' and I was like, 'No, that's what Michael did. You're doing the right thing.

Other major influence

Various named him a main or major influence or have known to heavily reference him.


Widening the craft

Michael Jackson is given mention by artists to have widened particular aspects of the music industry or expanded their view on their own ability.


Overall impact

Michael Jackson has also been referenced by artists as a major influence on the music industry.


Academia

In academia, there are several courses available on Michael Jackson in universities. Librarians from Texas Tech University gathered a list of scholarly papers and peer-reviewed articles which found him referenced in psychology, medical, chemistry, mass communications and engineering journals. They gathered 100 databases information for a special issue of The Journal of Pan African Studies on Jackson, calling the breadth of his influence "truly astounding".


Academic programs

Research works

See also

Notes

References

Citations

Bibliography



Tartan (Scottish Gaelic: breacan ), also known, especially in American English, as plaid  (/plæd/), is a patterned cloth consisting of crossing horizontal and vertical bands in multiple colours, forming repeating symmetrical patterns known as setts. Tartan patterns vary in complexity, from simple two-colour designs to intricate motifs with over twenty hues. Originating in woven wool, tartan is most strongly associated with Scotland, where it has been used for centuries in traditional clothing such as the kilt. Specific tartans are linked to Scottish clans, families, or regions, with patterns and colours derived historically from local natural dyes (now supplanted by artificial ones). Tartans also serve institutional roles, including military uniforms and organisational branding.


Tartan became a symbol of Scottish identity, especially from the 17th century onward, despite a ban under the Dress Act 1746 lasting about two generations following the Jacobite rising of 1745. The 19th-century Highland Revival popularized tartan globally by associating it with Highland dress and the Scottish diaspora. Today, tartan is used worldwide in clothing, accessories, and design, transcending its traditional roots. Modern tartans are registered for organisations, individuals, and commemorative purposes, with thousands of designs in the Scottish Register of Tartans.


While often linked to Scottish heritage, tartans exist in other cultures, such as Africa, East and South Asia, and Eastern Europe. The earliest surviving samples of tartan-style cloth are around 3,000 years old and were discovered in Xinjiang, China.


Etymology and terminology

The English and Scots word tartan is possibly derived from French tiretaine meaning 'linsey-woolsey cloth'. Other hypotheses are that it derives from Scottish Gaelic tarsainn or tarsuinn, meaning 'across' or 'crossing over'; or from French tartarin or tartaryn (occurring in 1454 spelled tartyn) meaning 'Tartar cloth'. It is unrelated to the superficially similar word tarlatan, which refers to a very open-weave muslin similar to cheesecloth. Tartan is both a mass noun ("12 metres of tartan") and a count noun ("12 different tartans").


Today, tartan refers to coloured patterns, though originally did not have to be made up of a pattern at all, as it referred to the type of weave; as late as the 1820s, some tartan cloth was described as "plain coloured ... without pattern". Patterned cloth from the Gaelic-speaking Scottish Highlands was called breacan, meaning 'many colours'. Over time, the meanings of tartan and breacan were combined to describe a certain type of pattern on a certain type of cloth.


The pattern of a particular tartan is called its sett. The sett is made up of a series of lines at specific widths which cross at right angles and blend into each other; the longer term setting is occasionally used. Sett can refer to either the minimal visual presentation of the complete tartan pattern or to a textual representation of it (in a thread count).


Today tartan is used more generally to describe the pattern, not limited to textiles, appearing on media such as paper, plastics, packaging, and wall coverings.


In North America, the term plaid is commonly used to refer to tartan. Plaid, derived from the Scottish Gaelic plaide meaning 'blanket', was first used of any rectangular garment, sometimes made up of tartan, which could be worn several ways: the belted plaid (breacan féile) or "great kilt" which preceded the modern kilt; the arisaid (earasaid), a large shawl that could be wrapped into a dress; and several types of shoulder cape, such as the full plaid and fly plaid. In time, plaid was used to describe blankets themselves. In former times, the term plaiding or pladding was sometimes used to refer to tartan cloth.


Weaving and design

Weaving construction

The Scottish Register of Tartans provides the following summary definition of tartan:


Tartan (the design) is a pattern that comprises two or more different solid-coloured stripes that can be of similar but are usually of differing proportions that repeat in a defined sequence. The sequence of the warp colours (long-ways threads) is repeated in same order and size in the weft (cross-ways threads). The majority of such patterns (or setts) are symmetrical, i.e. the pattern repeats in the same colour order and proportions in every direction from the two pivot points. In the less common asymmetric patterns, the colour sequence repeats in blocks as opposed to around alternating pivots but the size and colour sequence of warp and weft remain the same.

In more detail, traditional tartan cloth is a tight, staggered 2/2 twill weave of worsted wool: the horizontal weft (also woof or fill) is woven in a simple arrangement of two-over-two-under the fixed, vertical warp, advancing one thread at each pass. As each thread in the weft crosses threads in the warp, the staggering by one means that each warp thread will also cross two weft threads. The result, when the material is examined closely, is a characteristic 45-degree diagonal pattern of "ribs" where different colours cross. Where a thread in the weft crosses threads of the same colour in the warp, this produces a solid colour on the tartan, while a weft thread crossing warp threads of a different colour produces an equal admixture of the two colours alternating, producing the appearance of a third colour – a halftone blend or mixture – when viewed from further back. (The effect is similar to multicolour halftone printing, or cross-hatching in coloured-pencil art.) Thus, a set of two base colours produces three different colours including one blend, increasing quadratically with the number of base colours; so a set of six base colours produces fifteen blends and a total of twenty-one different perceived colours. This means that the more stripes and colours used, the more blurred and subdued the tartan's pattern becomes. Unlike in simple checker (chequer) or dicing patterns (like a chessboard), no solid colour in a tartan appears next to another solid colour, only a blend (solid colours may touch at their corners).


James D. Scarlett (2008) offered a definition of a usual tartan pattern (some types of tartan deviate from the particulars of this definition.mw-parser-output div.crossreference{padding-left:0} – see below):


The unit of tartan pattern, the sett, is a square, composed of a number of rectangles, square and oblong, arranged symmetrically around a central square. Each of these elements occurs four times, at intervals of ninety degrees, and each is rotated ninety degrees in relation to its fellows. The proportions of the elements are determined by the relative widths of the stripes that form them.

The sequence of thread colours in the sett (the minimal design of the tartan, to be duplicated – "the DNA of a tartan"), starts at an edge and either reverses or (rarely) repeats on what are called pivot points or pivots. In diagram A, the sett begins at the first pivot, reverses at the second pivot, continues, then reverses again at the next pivot, and will carry on in this manner horizontally. In diagram B, the sett proceeds in the same way as in the warp but vertically. The diagrams illustrate the construction of a typical symmetric (also symmetrical, reflective, reversing, or mirroring) tartan. However, on a rare asymmetric (asymmetrical, or non-reversing) tartan, the sett does not reverse at the pivots, it just repeats at them. An old term for the latter type is cheek or cheeck pattern. Also, some tartans (very few among traditional Scottish tartans) do not have exactly the same sett for the warp and weft. This means the warp and weft will have differing thread counts (see below). Asymmetric and differing-warp-and-weft patterns are more common in madras cloth (see § Indian madras, below) and some other weaving traditions than in Scottish tartan.


A tartan is recorded by counting the threads of each colour that appear in the sett. The thread count (or threadcount, thread-count) not only describes the width of the stripes on a sett, but also the colours used (typically abbreviated). Usually every number in a thread count is an even number to assist in manufacture. The first and last threads of the thread count are the pivots. A thread count combined with exact colour information and other weaving details is referred to as a ticket stamp or simply ticket.


There is no universally standardised way to write a thread count, but the different systems are easy to distinguish. As a simple example:


In all of these cases, the result is a half-sett thread count, which represents the threading before the pattern mirrors and completes; a full-sett thread count for a mirroring (symmetric) tartan is redundant. A "/" can also be used between two colour codes (e.g. "W/Y24" for "white/yellow 24") to create even more of a shorthand threadcount for simple tartans in which half of the half-sett pattern is different from the other only in the way of a colour swap; but this is not a common style of thread-counting.


Various writers and tartan databases do not use a consistent set of colour names (see § Colour, palettes, and meaning, below) and abbreviations, so a thread count may not be universally understandable without a colour key/legend. Some recorders prefer to begin a thread count at the pivot with the colour name (or abbreviation) that is first in alphabetical order (e.g. if there is a white pivot and a blue one, begin with blue), but this is actually arbitrary.


Though thread counts are quite specific, they can be modified depending on the desired size of the tartan. For example, the sett of a tartan (e.g., 6 inches square – a typical size for kilts) may be too large to fit upon the face of a necktie. In this case, the thread count would be reduced in proportion (e.g. to 3 inches to a side). In some works, a thread count is reduced to the smallest even number of threads (often down to 2) required to accurately reproduce the design; in such a case, it is often necessary to up-scale the thread count proportionally for typical use in kilts and plaids.


Before the 19th century, tartan was often woven with thread for the weft that was up to 1/3 thicker than the fine thread used for the warp, which would result in a rectangular rather than square pattern; the solution was to adjust the weft thread count to return the pattern to square, or make it non-square on purpose, as is still done in a handful of traditional tartans. Uneven warp-and-weft thread thickness could also contribute to a striped rather than checked appearance in some tartan samples.


The predominant colours of a tartan (the widest bands) are called the under-check (or under check, undercheck, under-cheque); sometimes the terms ground, background, or base are used instead, especially if there is only one dominant colour. Thin, contrasting lines are referred to as the over-check (also over-stripe or overstripe). Over-checks in pairs are sometimes referred to as tram lines, tramlines, or tram tracks. Bright over-checks are sometimes bordered on either side (usually both), for extra contrast, by additional thin lines, often black, called guard lines or guards. Historically, the weaver William Wilson & Son of Bannockburn sometimes wove bright over-checks in silk, to give some added shine (commercially around 1820–30, but in regimental officers' plaids back to at least 1794). Tartan used for plaids (not the belted plaid) often have a purled fringe.


An old-time practice, to the 18th century, was to add an accent on plaids or sometimes kilts in the form of a selvedge in herringbone weave at the edge, 1–3 inches (2.5–7.6 cm) wide, but still fitting into the colour pattern of the sett; a few modern weavers will still produce some tartan in this style. Sometimes more decorative selvedges were used: Selvedge marks were borders (usually on one side only) formed by repeating a colour from the sett in a broad band (often in herringbone), sometimes further bordered by a thin strip of another colour from the sett or decorated in mid-selvedge with two thin strips; these were typically used for the bottoms of belted plaids and kilts, and were usually black in military tartans, but could be more colourful in civilian ones. The more elaborate selvedge patterns were a wider series of narrow stripes using some or all of the colours of the sett; these were almost exclusively used on household tartans (blankets, curtains, etc.), and on two opposing sides of the fabric. The very rare total border is an all-four-sides selvedge of a completely different sett; described by Peter Eslea MacDonald (2019) as "an extraordinarily difficult feature to weave and can be regarded as the zenith of the tartan weaver's art", it only survives in Scottish-style tartan as a handful of 18th-century samples (in Scotland and Nova Scotia, Canada, but probably all originally from Scotland). The style has also been used in Estonia in the weaving of suurrätt shawls/plaids.


Tartan is usually woven balanced-warp (or just balanced), repeating evenly from a pivot point at the centre outwards and with a complete sett finishing at the outer selvedge; e.g. a piece of tartan for a plaid might be 24 setts long and 4 wide. An offset, off-set, or unbalanced weave is one in which the pattern finishes at the edge in the middle of a pivot colour; this was typically done with pieces intended to be joined (e.g. for a belted plaid or a blanket) to make larger spans of cloth with the pattern continuing across the seam; if the tartan had a selvedge mark or selvedge pattern, it was at the other side of the warp.


The term hard tartan refers to a version of the cloth woven with very tightly wound, non-fuzzy thread, producing a comparatively rougher and denser (though also thinner) material than is now typical for kilts. It was in common use up until the 1830s. There are extant but uncommon samples of hard tartan from the early 18th century that use the more intricate herringbone instead of twill weave throughout the entire cloth.


While modern tartan is primarily a commercial enterprise on large power looms, tartan was originally the product of rural weavers of the pre-industrial age, and can be produced by a dedicated hobbyist with a strong, stable hand loom. Since around 1808, the traditional size of the warp reed for tartan is 37 inches (94 cm), the length of the Scottish ell (previous sizes were sometimes 34 and 40 inches). Telfer Dunbar (1979) describes the setup thus:


The reed varies in thickness according to the texture of the material to be woven. A thirty-Porter (which contains 20 splits of the reed) or 600-reed, is divided into 600 openings in the breadth of 37 inches. Twenty of these openings are called a Porter and into each opening are put two threads, making 1,200 threads of warp and as many of weft in a square yard of tartan through a 30-Porter reed.

Splits are also referred to as dents, and Porters are also called gangs.


Styles and design principles

Traditional tartan patterns can be divided into several style classes. The most basic is a simple two-colour check of thick bands (with or without thin over-checks of one or more other colours). A variant on this splits one or more of the bands, to form squares of smaller squares instead of just big, solid squares; a style heavily favoured in Vestiarium Scoticum. A complexity step up is the superimposed check, in which a third colour is placed centrally "on top of" or "inside" (surrounded by) one of the base under-check colours, providing a pattern of nested squares, which might then also have thin, bright and/or black over-checks added. Another group is multiple checks, typically of two broad bands of colour on a single dominant "background" (e.g. red, blue, red, green, red – again possibly with contrasting narrow over-checks). The aforementioned types can be combined into more complex tartans. In any of these styles, an over-check is sometimes not a new colour but one of the under-check colours "on top of" the other under-check. A rare style, traditionally used for arisaid (earasaid) tartans but no longer in much if any Scottish use, is a pattern consisting entirely of thin over-checks, sometimes grouped, "on" a single ground colour, usually white. M. Martin (1703) reported that the line colours were typically blue, black, and red. Examples of this style do not survive, at least not in the tartan databases (there may be preserved museum pieces with such patterns). Some tartan patterns are more abstract and do not fit into any of these styles, especially in madras cloth (see § Indian madras, below).


There are no codified rules or principles of tartan design, but a few writers have offered some considered opinions. Banks & de La Chapelle (2007) summarized, with a view to broad, general tartan use, including for fashion: "Color – and how it is worked – is pivotal to tartan design.... Thus, tartans should be composed of clear, bright colors, but ones sufficiently soft to blend well and thereby create new shades." James D. Scarlett (2008) noted: "the more colours to begin with, the more subdued the final effect", or put more precisely, "the more stripes to the sett and the more colours used, the more diffuse and 'blurred' the pattern". That does not necessarily translate into subtlety; a tartan of many colours and stripes can seem "busy".


Scarlett (2008), after extensive research into historical Highland patterns (which were dominated by rich red and medium green in about equal weight with dark blue as a blending accent – not accounting for common black lines), suggested that for a balanced and traditional style:


any basic tartan type of design should have for its background, a "high impact" colour and two others, of which one should be the complement to the first and the other a darker and more neutral shade; other colours, introduced to break up the pattern or as accents, should be a matter of taste. It is important that no colour should be so strong as to "swamp" another; otherwise, the blending of colours at the crossing will be adversely affected. ... Tartan is a complex abstract art-form with a strong mathematical undertone, far removed from a simple check with a few lines of contrasting colours scattered over it.

Scarlett (1990) provided a more general explanation, traditional styles aside:


Colours for tartan work require to be clear and unambiguous and bright but soft, to give good contrast of both colour and brightness and to mix well so as to give distinctly new shades where two colours cross without any one swamping another.

Further, Scarlett (1990) held that "background checks will show a firm but not harsh contrast and the overchecks will be such as to show clearly" on the under-check (or "background") colours. He summed up the desired total result as "a harmonious blend of colour and pattern worthy to be looked upon as an art form in its own right".


Omitting traditional black lines has a strong softening effect, as in the 1970s Missoni fashion ensemble (top right) and in many madras patterns (see § Indian madras, below). A Scottish black-less design (now the Mar dress tartan) dates to the 18th century; another is Ruthven (1842, above), and many of the Ross tartans (e.g. 1886, above), as well as several of the Victorian–Edwardian MacDougal designs, are further examples. Various modern tartans also use this effect, e.g. Canadian Maple Leaf (1964, at § Regional, below). Clever use of black or another dark colour can produce a visual perception of depth.


Colour, palettes, and meaning

There is no set of exact colour standards for tartan hues; thread colour varies from weaver to weaver even for "the same" colour. A certain range of general colours, however, are traditional in Scottish tartan. These include blue (dark), crimson (rose or dark red), green (medium-dark), black, grey (medium-dark), purple, red (scarlet or bright), tan/brown, white (actually natural undyed wool, called lachdann in Gaelic), and yellow. Some additional colours that have been used more rarely are azure (light or sky blue), maroon, and vert (bright or grass green), plus light grey (as seen in Balmoral tartan, though it is sometimes given as lavender). Since the opening of the tartan databases to registration of newly designed tartans, including many for organisational and fashion purposes, a wider range of colours have been involved, such as orange and pink, which were not often used (as distinct colours rather than as renditions of red) in old traditional tartans. The Scottish Register of Tartans uses a long list of colours keyed to hexadecimal "Web colours", sorting groups of hues into a constrained set of basic codes (but expanded upon the above traditional list, with additional options like dark orange, dark yellow, light purple, etc.). This helps designers fit their creative tartan into a coding scheme while allowing weavers to produce an approximation of that design from readily stocked yarn supplies.


In the mid-19th century, the natural dyes that had been traditionally used in the Highlands (like various lichens, alder bark, bilberry, cochineal, heather, indigo, woad, and yellow bedstraw) began to be replaced by artificial dyes, which were easier to use and were more economic for the booming tartan industry, though also less subtle. Although William Morris in the late-19th-century Arts and Crafts movement tried to revive use of British natural dyes, most were so low-yield and so inconsistent from locality to locality (part of the reason for the historical tartan differentiation by area) that they proved to have little mass-production potential, despite some purple dye (cudbear) commercialisation efforts in Glasgow in the 18th century. The hard-wound, fine wool used in tartan weaving was rather resistant to natural dyes, and some dye baths required days or even weeks. The dyeing also required mordants to fix the colours permanently, usually metallic salts like alum; there are records from 1491 of alum being imported to Leith, though not necessarily all for tartan production in particular. Some colours of dye were usually imported, especially red cochineal and to some extent blue indigo (both expensive and used to deepen native dyes), from the Low Countries, with which Scotland had extensive trade since the 15th century. Aged human urine (called fual or graith) was also used, as a colour-deepener, a dye solubility agent, a lichen fermenter, and a final colour-fastness treatment. All commercially manufactured tartan today is coloured using artificial not natural dyes, even in the less saturated colour palettes.


The hues of colours in any established tartan can be altered to produce variations of the same tartan. Such varying of the hues to taste dates to at least the 1788 pattern book of manufacturer William Wilson & Son of Bannockburn. Today, the semi-standardised colour schemes or palettes (what marketers might call "colourways") are divided generally into modern, ancient, muted, and weathered (sometimes with other names, depending on weaver). These terms only refer to relative dye "colourfulness" saturation levels and do not represent distinct tartans.


Some particular tartan mills have introduced other colour schemes that are unique to that weaver and only available in certain tartans. Two examples are Lochcarron's antique, between modern and ancient; and D. C. Dalgliesh's reproduction, a slight variation on weathered, dating to the 1940s and claimed to be based on 18th-century samples.


A general observation about ancient/old, weathered/faded, and muted are that they rather uniformly reduce the saturation of all colours, while actual natural-dyed tartan samples show that the historical practice was usually to pair one or more saturated colours with one or more pale ones, for greater clarity and depth, a "harmonious balance". According to Scarlett (1990): "The colours were clear, bright and soft, altogether unlike the eye-searing brilliance or washed-out dullness of modern tartans".


The same tartan in the same palette from two manufacturers will not precisely match; there is considerable artistic license involved in exactly how saturated to make a hue.


Tartan-generation software can approximate the appearance of a tartan in any of these palettes. The examples below are all the "Prince Charles Edward Stuart" tartan:


Scottish tartans that use two or more hues of the same basic colour are fairly rare. The best known is the British royal family's Balmoral (1853, two greys, both as under-check – see illustration at § Family and individual, below). Others include: Akins (1850, two reds, one as over-check and sometimes rendered purple), MacBean (1872, two reds, one as over-check and sometimes rendered purple), Childers Universal regimental (1907, two greens, both under-check), Gordon red (recorded 1930–1950 but probably considerably older; two blues and two reds, one of each used more or less as over-checks), Galloway district hunting/green (1939/1950s, two greens, both under-check), US Air Force Reserve Pipe Band (1988, two blues, both under-check), McCandlish (1992, three variants, all under-check), Isle of Skye district (1992, three greens, all arguably under-check, nested within each other), and Chisholm Colonial (2008, two blues, one an over-check, the other nearly blended into green). The practice is more common in very recent commercial tartans that have no association with Scottish families or districts, such as the Loverboy fashion label tartan (2018, three blues, one an over-check).


The idea that the various colours used in tartan have a specific meaning is purely a modern one, notwithstanding a legend that red tartans were "battle tartans", designed so they would not show blood. It is only recently created tartans, such as Canadian provincial and territorial tartans (beginning 1950s) and US state tartans (beginning 1980s), that are stated to be designed with certain symbolic meaning for the colours used. For example, green sometimes represents prairies or forests, blue can represent lakes and rivers, and yellow might stand for various crops. In the Scottish Register of Tartans (and the databases before it), colour inspiration notes are often recorded by a tartan's designer. However, there is no common set of tartan colour or pattern "motifs" with allusive meanings that is shared among designers.


More abstractly, from an art criticism perspective, design historian Richard Martin (1988) wrote of tartans as designs and tartan as a textile class having no truly endemic or objectified meanings, but being an art that "has the property of being a vessel or container of meaning, a design form that exists not only in history but through history", capable of conveying radically different, even contradictory, contextual meanings "ever changing and evolving" through socio-cultural transmutation of the fabric's use. Thus tartan could veer from symbol of anti-union and Jacobite Highland rebellion to emblem of pan-British loyalty to empire in the space of two generations, or serve different fashion markets in the same recent decades as both a sartorial status symbol of traditional values and a punk and grunge rebel banner.


Early history

Pre-medieval origins

Today, tartan is mostly associated with Scotland; however, the oldest tartan-patterned twill cloth ever discovered dates to a heterogenous culture of the Tarim Basin, c. 2100 BC through the first centuries AD in what today is Xinjiang, China, southeast of Kazakhstan. The tartan fabric (along with other types of simple and patterned cloth) was recovered, in excavations beginning in 1978, with other grave goods of the Tarim or Ürümqi mummies – a group of often Caucasoid (light-haired, round-eyed) bodies naturally preserved by the arid desert rather than intentionally mummified. The most publicised of them is the Chärchän Man, buried around 1,000 BC with tartan-like leggings in the Taklamakan Desert. Other twill tartan samples (with differing warp and weft) were recovered in the region from the site of Qizilchoqa in 1979, dating to around 1,200 BC; the material was woven with up to six colours and required a sophisticated loom (of a type that seems to have originated in the West). Victor H. Mair, an archaeologist and linguist involved in the excavations wrote: "The ancient inhabitants ... undoubtedly had vibrant interactions with peoples of West Central Asia and even further west, since their magnificent textiles possess motifs, dyes, and weaves that are characteristic of cultures that lie in that direction."


Textile analysis of that fabric has shown it to be similar to that of ancient Europe. According to textile historian Elizabeth J. Wayland Barber, the late Bronze Age to early Iron Age people of Central Europe, the Hallstatt culture, which is linked with ancient Celtic populations and flourished between the 8th and 6th centuries BC, produced tartan-like textiles. Some of them were discovered in 2004, remarkably preserved, in the Hallstatt salt mines near Salzburg, Austria; they feature a mix of natural-coloured and dyed wool. Some date as early as 1200 BC, and Wayland Barber says of them that: "The overall similarities between Hallstatt plaid twills and recent Scottish ones, right down to the typical weight of the cloth, strongly indicate continuity of tradition. The chief difference is that the Hallstatt plaids contain no more than two colors". Similar finds have been made elsewhere in Central Europe and Scandinavia.


Classical Roman writers made various references to the continental Gauls, south of Britain, wearing striped or variegated clothing; Latin seems to have lacked an exact word for 'checked'. For example, Virgil in the Aeneid (29–19 BC, book VIII, line 660) described the Gauls as virgatis lucent sagulis (or sagalis) meaning something like 'they shine in striped cloaks' or 'their cloaks are striped brightly'. Other writers used words such as pictae and virgatae with translations like 'marled', 'variegated', 'particoloured', etc. Scarlett (1990) warns: "What is not reasonable is the ready assumption by many modern authors that every time one of these words, or something like it, was used, tartan was intended." It might have been intended sometimes, or the writer might have just meant linear stripes like seersucker cloth. Both Scarlett and Thompson (1992) decry the unsustainable assumption by a few earlier modern writers (e.g. James Grant, 1886) that Gauls must have been running around in clan tartans. The Romans particularly wrote of Gauls as wearing striped braccae (trousers). E. G. Cody, in remarks in his 1885 edition of John Lesley's Historie of Scotland, hypothesized that this was actually a Gaulish loanword and was cognate with Gaelic breacan. This is one of many "tartan legends" that is not well accepted; rather, braccae is considered by modern linguists a cognate of English breeches, Gaelic briogais ('trousers'), etc.


The earliest documented tartan-like cloth in Britain, known as the "Falkirk tartan", dates from the 3rd century AD. It was uncovered at Falkirk in Stirlingshire, Scotland, near the Antonine Wall. The fragment, held in the National Museum of Scotland, was stuffed into the mouth of an earthenware pot containing almost 2,000 Roman coins. The Falkirk tartan has a simple "Border check" design, of undyed light and dark wool. Other evidence from this period is the surviving fragment of a statue of Roman Emperor Caracalla, once part of the triumphal arch of Volubilis completed in 217 AD. It depicts a Caledonian Pictish prisoner wearing tartan trews (represented by carving a checked design then inlaying it with bronze and silver alloys to give a variegated appearance). Based on such evidence, tartan researcher James D. Scarlett (1990) believes Scottish tartan to be "of Pictish or earlier origin", though Brown (2012) notes there is no way to prove or disprove this.


Early forms of tartan like this are thought to have been invented in pre-Roman times, and would have been popular among the inhabitants of the northern Roman provinces as well as in other parts of Northern Europe such as Jutland, where the same pattern was prevalent, and Bronze Age Sweden.


That twill weave was selected, even in ancient times, is probably no accident; "plain (2/2) twill for a given gauge of yarn, yields a cloth 50% heavier  – and hence more weather-proof – than the simple 1/1 weave." According to Scarlett (2008):


here are sound reasons why such a type of pattern-textile should have developed almost automatically in isolated, self-sufficient ... communities. Such communities are unlikely to possess large dye-vats, and so cannot piece-dye woven cloth; such processes as batik and tie-dye are unavailable. ... Stripes are the practical solution, since they use small quantities of a colour at a time and are interspersed with other colours, but the scope is limited ...; stripes across both brighten the colours and add many mixtures. From there on it is really only a matter of getting organised; the now-geometric pattern reduces to a small unit, easier to remember and to follow in a world where little was written down; it is further simplified by being split into two equal halves and, with weft as warp, the weft pattern can be followed from the warp.

Medieval

There is little written or pictorial evidence about tartan (much less surviving tartan cloth) from the medieval era. Tartan use in Britain between the 3rd-century Falkirk tartan and 16th-century samples, writings, and art is unclear. Cosmo Innes (1860) wrote that, according to medieval hagiographies, Scots of the 7th–8th centuries "used cloaks of variegated colour, apparently of home manufacture". Based on similarities of tartans used by various clans, including the Murrays, Sutherlands, and Gordons, and the history of their family interactions over the centuries, Thomas Innes of Learney estimated that a regional "parent" pattern, of a more general style, might date to the 12th or 13th century, but this is quite speculative. The cartularies of Aberdeen in the 13th century barred clergymen from wearing "striped" clothing, which could have referred to tartan.


In 1333, Italian Gothic artists Simone Martini and Lippo Memmi produced the Annunciation with St. Margaret and St. Ansanus, a wood-panel painting in tempera and gold leaf. It features the archangel Gabriel in a tartan-patterned mantle, with light highlights where the darker stripes meet, perhaps representing jewels, embroidery, or supplementary weaving. Art historians consider it an example of "Tartar" (Mongol) textile influence; it likely has no relation to Scottish tartan. "Tartar" cloth came in a great array of patterns, many more complex than tartan (such as the fine detail in Gabriel's robe in the same painting); patterns of this sort were influential especially on Italian art in the 14th century.


There are several other continental European paintings of tartan-like garments from around this era (even back to the 13th century), but most of them show very simple two-colour basic check patterns, or (like the Martini and Memmi Annunciation example) broad squares made by thin lines of one colour on a background of another. Any of them could represent embroidery or patchwork rather than woven tartan. There seems to be no indication in surviving records of tartan material being imported from Scotland in this period. In the second half of the 14th century, the artist known only as the "Master of Estamariu" (in Catalonia, Spain) painted an altarpiece of St Vincent, one of the details of which is a man in a cotehardie that is red on one half and a complex three-colour tartan on the other, which is very similar to later-attested Scottish tartans.


Sir Francis James Grant, mid-20th-century Lord Lyon King of Arms, noted that records showed the wearing of tartan in Scotland to date as far back as 1440. However, it is unclear to which records he was referring, and other, later researchers have not matched this early date.


16th century

The oldest surviving sample of complex, dyed-wool tartan (not just a simple check pattern) in Scotland has been shown through radiocarbon dating to be from the 16th century; known as the "Glen Affric tartan", it was discovered in the early 1980s in a peat bog near Glen Affric in the Scottish Highlands; its faded colours include green, brown, red, and yellow. On loan from the Scottish Tartans Authority, the 55 cm × 42 cm (22 in × 17 in) artefact went on display at the V&A Dundee museum in April 2023.


The earliest certain written reference to tartan by name is in the 1532–33 accounts of the Treasurer of Scotland: "Ane uthir tartane galcoit gevin to the king be the Maister Forbes" ('Another tartan coat given to the king by the Master Forbes'), followed not long after by a 1538 record of clothing made by Thomas Arthur for King James V of Scotland, which includes "heland tertane to be hoiss" ('Highland tartan to be hose'). Plaids were featured a bit earlier; poet William Dunbar (c. 1459 – c. 1530) mentions "Five thousand ellis ... Of Hieland pladdis". The earliest surviving image of a Highlander in what was probably meant to represent tartan is a 1567–80 watercolour by Lucas de Heere, showing a man in a belted, pleated yellow tunic with a thin-lined checked pattern, a light-red cloak, and tight blue shorts (of a type also seen in period Irish art), with claymore and dirk. It looks much like medieval illustrations of "Tartar" cloth and thus cannot be certain to represent true tartan. By the late 16th century, there are numerous references to striped or checked plaids. Supposedly, the earliest pattern that is still produced today (though not in continual use) is the Lennox district tartan, (also adopted as the clan tartan of Lennox) said to have been reproduced by D. W. Stewart in 1893 from a portrait of Margaret Douglas, Countess of Lennox, dating to around 1575. However, this seems to be legend, as no modern tartan researchers or art historians have identified such a portrait, and the earliest known realistic one of a woman in tartan dates much later, to c. 1700. Extant portraits of Margaret show her in velvet and brocade.


Tartan and Highland dress in the Elizabethan era have been said to have become essentially classless – worn in the Highlands by everyone from high-born lairds to common crofters, at least by the late 16th century. The historian John Major wrote in 1521 that it was the upper class, including warriors, who wore plaids while the common among them wore linen, suggesting that woollen cloth was something of a luxury. But by 1578, Bishop John Lesley of Ross wrote that the belted plaid was the general Highland costume of both rich and poor, with the nobility simply able to afford larger plaids with more colours. (Later, Burt (1726) also wrote of gentlemen having larger plaids than commoners.) If colours conveyed distinction, it was of social class not clan. D. W. Stewart (1893) attributed the change, away from linen, to broader manufacture of woollen cloth and "the increased prosperity of the people".


Many writers of the period drew parallels between Irish and Highland dress, especially the wearing of a long yellow-dyed shirt called the léine or saffron shirt (though probably not actually dyed with expensive imported saffron), worn with a mantle (cloak) over it, and sometimes with trews. It is not entirely certain when these mantles were first made of tartan in the Highlands, but the distinctive cloth seems to get its recorded mentions first in the 16th century, starting with Major (1521). In 1556, Jean de Beaugué, a French witness of Scottish troops at the 1548 Siege of Haddington, distinguished Lowlanders from Highland "savages", and wrote of the latter as wearing dyed shirts "and a certain light covering made of wool of various colours". George Buchanan in 1582 wrote that "plaids of many colours" had a long tradition but that the Highland fashion by his era had mostly shifted to a plainer look, especially brown tones, as a practical matter of camouflage. Fynes Moryson wrote in 1598 (published 1617) of common Highland women wearing "plodan", "a course stuffe, of two or three colours in Checker worke".


Its dense weave requiring specialised skills and equipment, tartan was not generally one individual's work but something of an early cottage industry in the Highlands – an often communal activity called calanas, including some associated folk singing traditions – with several related occupational specialties (wool comber, dyer, waulker, warp-winder, weaver) among people in a village, part-time or full-time, especially women. The spinning wheel was a late technological arrival in the Highlands, and tartan in this era was woven from fine (but fairly inconsistent) hard-spun yarn that was spun by hand on drop spindles. The era's commerce in tartans was centred on Inverness, the early business records of which are filled with many references to tartan goods. Tartan patterns were loosely associated with the weavers of particular areas, owing in part to differences in availability of natural dyes, and it was common for Highlanders to wear whatever was available to them, often a number of different tartans at the same time. The early tartans found in east-coastal Scotland used red more often, probably because of easier continental-European trade in the red dye cochineal, while western tartans were more often in blues and greens, owing to the locally available dyes. (See also § Colour, palettes, and meaning.) The greater expense of red dye may have also made it a status symbol. Tartan spread at least somewhat out of the Highlands, but was not universally well received. The General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland in 1575 prohibited the ministers and readers of the church (and their wives) from wearing tartan plaids and other "sumptuous" clothing, while the council of Aberdeen, "a district by no means Highland", in 1576 banned the wearing of plaids (probably meaning belted plaids).


A 1594 Irish account by Lughaidh Ó Cléirigh of Scottish gallowglass mercenaries in Ireland clearly describes the belted plaid, "a mottled garment with numerous colours hanging in folds to the calf of the leg, with a girdle round the loins over the garment". The privately organised early "plantations" (colonies) and later governmental Plantation of Ulster brought tartan weaving to Northern Ireland in the late 16th to early 17th centuries. Many of the new settlers were Scots, and they joined the population already well-established there by centuries of gallowglass and other immigrants. In 1956, the earliest surviving piece of Irish tartan cloth was discovered in peaty loam just outside Dungiven in Northern Ireland, in the form of tartan trews, along with other non-tartan clothing items. It was dubbed the "Dungiven tartan" or "Ulster tartan". The sample was dated using palynology to c. 1590–1650 (the soil that surrounded the cloth was saturated with pollen from Scots pine, a species imported to Ulster from Scotland by plantationers). According to archaeological textile expert Audrey Henshall, the cloth was probably woven in County Donegal, Ireland, but the trews tailored in the Scottish Highlands at some expense, suggesting someone of rank, possibly a gallowglass. Henshall reproduced the tartan for a 1958 exhibit; it became popular (and heavily promoted) as a district tartan for Ulster (both in a faded form, like it was found, and a bright palette that attempted to reproduce what it may have originally looked like), and seems to have inspired the later creation of more Irish district tartans. (see § Regional, below). There is nearly nothing in period source material to suggest that the Irish also habitually wore tartan; one of the only sources that can possibly be interpreted in support of the idea is William Camden, who wrote in his Britannia (since at least the 1607 edition) that "Highlandmen ... wear after the Irish fashion striped mantles".


17th century

The earliest unambiguous surviving image of Highlanders in an approximation of tartan is a watercolour, dating to c. 1603–1616 and rediscovered in the late 20th century, by Hieronymus Tielsch or Tielssch. It shows a man's belted plaid, and a woman's plaid (arisaid, earasaid) worn as a shawl or cloak over a dress, and also depicts diced short hose and a blue bonnet. Clans had for a long time independently raised militias, and starting in 1603, the British government itself mustered irregular militia units in the Highlands, known as the Independent Highland Companies (IHCs). Being Highlanders, they were probably wearing tartan (1631 Highland mercenaries certainly were, and the ICHs were in tartan in 1709 and actual uniforms of tartan by 1725). Tartan was used as a furnishing fabric, including bed hangings at Ardstinchar Castle in 1605. After mention of Highlanders' "striped mantles" in Camden's Britannia of 1607, poet John Taylor wrote in 1618 in The Pennyless Pilgrimage of "tartane" Highland garb in detail (in terms that generally match what was described and illustrated even two centuries later); he noted that it was worn not just by locals but also by visiting British gentlemen. The council of Aberdeen again cracked down on plaids in 1621, this time against their use as women's head-wear, and the kirk in Glasgow had previously, in 1604, forbidden their wear during services; similar kirk session rulings appeared in Elgin in 1624, in Kinghorn in 1642 and 1644, and Monifieth in 1643, with women's plaids more literarily censured in Edinburgh in 1633 by William Lithgow. In 1622, the Baron Courts of Breadalbane set fixed prices for different complexities of tartan and plain cloth.


In 1627, a tartan-dressed body of Highland archers served under the Earl of Morton. More independent companies were raised in 1667. The earliest image of Scottish soldiers in tartan is a 1631 copperplate engraving by Georg Köler (1600–1638); it features Highland mercenaries of the Thirty Years' War in the forces of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden. Not long after, James Gordon, Parson of Rothiemay, wrote in A History of Scots Affairs from 1637 to 1641 of the belted plaid as "a loose Cloke of several Ells, striped and party colour'd, which they gird breadthwise with a Leathern Belt ...." He also described the short hose and trews ("trowzes"). A 1653 map, Scotia Antiqua by Joan Blaeu, features a cartouche that depicts men in trews and belted plaid; the tartan is crudely represented as just thin lines on a plain background, and various existing copies are hand-coloured differently. Daniel Defoe, in Memoirs of a Cavalier (c. 1720) wrote, using materials that probably dated to the English Civil War, of Highlanders invading Northern England back in 1639 that they had worn "doublet, breeches and stockings, of a stuff they called plaid, striped across red and yellow, with short cloaks of the same".


Besides the formerly often-chastised wearing of head-plaids in church, women's dress was not often described (except in earlier times as being similar to men's). The Highland and island women's equivalent of the belted plaid was the arisaid (earasaid), a plaid that could be worn as a large shawl or be wrapped into a dress. Sir William Brereton had written in 1634–35 (published 1844) of Lowland women in Edinburgh that: "Many wear (especially of the meaner sort) plaids ... which is  cast over their heads and covers their faces on both sides, and would reach almost to the ground, but that they pluck them up, and wear them cast under their arms." He also reported that women there wore "six or seven several habits and fashions, some for distinction of widows, wives and maids", including gowns, capes/cloaks, bonnets with bongrace veils, and collar ruffs, though he did not address tartan patterns in particular in such garments.


While tartan was still made in the Highlands as cottage industry, by 1655 production had centred on Aberdeen, made there "in greater plenty than  any other place of the nation whatsoever", though it was also manufactured in Glasgow, Montrose, and Dundee, much of it for export. In Glasgow at least, some of the trade was in tartan manufactured in the Highlands and the Hebrides and brought there for sale along with hides and other goods. Impressed by the trade in Glasgow, Richard Franck in his Northern Memoirs of 1658 wrote that the cloth was "the staple of this country". In 1662, the naturalist John Ray wrote of the "party coloured blanket which  call a plad, over their heads and shoulders", and commented that a Scotsman even of the lower class was "clad like a gentleman" because the habit in this time was to spend extraordinarily on clothing, a habit that seems to have gone back to the late 16th century. A Thomas Kirk of Yorkshire commented on trews, plaids, and possibly kilts of "plaid colour" in 1677; more material by Kirk was printed in the 1891 Early Travellers in Scotland edited by Peter Hume Brown, recording "plad wear" in the form of belted plaids, trews, and hose. A poem by William Cleland in 1678 had Scottish officers in trews and shoulder plaids, and soldiers in belted plaids. In 1689, Thomas Morer, an English clergyman to Scottish regiments, described Lowland women as frequently wearing plaids despite otherwise dressing mostly like the English.


The earliest known realistic portrait in tartan Highland dress is a piece (which exists in three versions) by John Michael Wright, showing a very complicated tartan of brown, black, and two hues of red; it is dated to c. 1683 and is of Mungo Murray, son of John Murray, Marquess of Atholl.


In 1688, William Sacheverell, lieutenant governor of the Isle of Man, wrote of the tartan plaids of the women of Mull in the Inner Hebrides as "much finer, the colours more lively, and the squares larger than the men's .... This serves them for a veil, and covers both head and body." In the 1691 poem The Grameid, James Philip of Almerieclose described the 1689 Battle of Killiecrankie in terms that seem to suggest that some clan militias had uniform tartan liveries, and some historians have interpreted it thus.


18th century

It is not until the early 18th century that regional uniformity in tartan, sufficient to identify the area of origin, is reported to have occurred. Martin Martin, in A Description of the Western Islands of Scotland, published in 1703, wrote, after describing trews and belted plaids "of divers Colours ... agreeable to the nicest Fancy", that tartans could be used to distinguish the inhabitants of different places. Martin did not mention anything like the use of a special pattern by each family.


In 1709, the Independent Highland Companies were wearing everyday Highland dress, not uniforms of a particular tartan, to better blend in with civilians and detect Jacobite treachery. In 1713, the Royal Company of Archers (a royal bodyguard unit first formed in 1676), became the first unit in service to the British crown who adopted a particular tartan as a part of their formal uniform. The militiamen of Clan Grant may have been all in green-and-red tartan (details unspecified) as early as 1703–04 and wearing a uniform tartan livery by 1715. It is not a surviving pattern, and modern Grant tartans are of much later date. (For details on early uniform tartans, see Regimental tartan § Pre-regiment military use.)


An account of the Highland men in 1711 had it that they all, including "those of the better sort", wore the belted plaid. A 1723 account suggested that gentlemen, at least when commingling with the English, were more likely to wear tartan trews and hose with their attendants in the belted plaid, which Burt also observed; trews were also more practical for horseback riding. Also around 1723, short tartan jackets, called in Gaelic còta-goirid, sometimes with slashed sleeves and worn with a matching waistcoat, made their first appearance and began supplanting, in Highland dress, the plain-coloured doublets that were common throughout European dress of the era; the còta-goirid was often worn with matching trews and a shoulder plaid that might or might not match, but could also be worn with a belted plaid.


M. Martin (1703) wrote that the "vulgar" Hebridean women still wore the arisaid wrap/dress, describing it as "a white Plad, having a few small Stripes of black, blue, and red; it reach'd from the Neck to the Heels, and was tied before on the Breast with a Buckle of Silver, or Brass", some very ornate. He said they also wore a decorated belt, scarlet sleeves, and head kerchiefs of linen. Martin was not the only period source to suggest it was primarily the wear of the common women, with upper-class Highland ladies in the 18th century more likely to wear tailored gowns, dresses, and riding habits, often of imported material, as did Lowland and English women. Highland women's dress was also sometimes simply in linear stripes rather than tartan, a cloth called iomairt (drugget). From the late 18th century, as the arisaid was increasingly set aside for contemporary womenswear, while Highland men continued wearing the belted plaid., the ladies' plaids were reduced to smaller "screens" – fringed shawls used as headdresses and as dress accessories, "a gentrification of the arisaid". (Wilsons continued producing these in the first half of the 19th century.) John Macky in A Journey Through Scotland (1723) wrote of Scottish women wearing, when about, such tartan plaids over their heads and bodies, over English-style dress, and likened the practice to continental women wearing black wraps for church, market, and other functions. Edmund Burt, an Englishman who spent years in and around Inverness, wrote in 1727–1737 (published 1754) that the women there also wore such plaids, made of fine worsted wool or even of silk, that they were sometimes used to cover the head, and that they were worn long, to the ankle, on one side. He added that in Edinburgh (far to the southeast) they were also worn, with ladies indicating their Whig or Tory political stance by which side they wore long (though he did not remember which side was which). In Edinburgh, perennial disapproval of the "barbarous habitte" of women wearing plaids over their heads returned in 1753 writings of William Maitland. Women first appear in known painted portraits with tartan c. 1700, with that of Rachel Gordon of Abergeldie; more early examples are found in 1742 and 1749 paintings by William Mosman,. They show plaids (in tartans that do not survive as modern patterns) worn loosely around the shoulders by sitters in typical European-fashion dresses. Some entire dresses of tartan feature in mid-18th-century portraits, but they are uncommon. In the Jacobite period, tartan was sometimes also used as trim, e.g. on hats. Plaids were worn also as part of wedding outfits. The monied sometimes had entire wedding dresses of tartan, some in silk, and even devised custom tartans for weddings, typically based on existing patterns with colours changed.


Portraits became more popular among the Highland elite starting in the early 18th century. Similar cloth to that in the c. 1683 Mungo Murray portrait appears in the 1708 portrait of the young John Campbell of Glenorchy, attributed to Charles Jervas; and the c. 1712 portrait of Kenneth Sutherland, Lord Duffus, by Richard Waitt. This style of very "busy" but brown-dominated tartan seems to have been fairly common through the early 18th century, and is quite different from later patterns. As the century wore on, bolder setts came to dominate, judging from later portraits and surviving cloth and clothing samples. By the early 18th century, tartan manufacture (and weaving in general) were centred in Bannockburn, Stirling; this is where the eventually dominant tartan weaver William Wilson & Son, founded c. 1765, were based.


Judging from rare surviving samples, the predominant civilian tartan colours of this period, in addition to white (undyed wool) and black, were rich reds and greens and rather dark blues, not consistent from area to area; where a good black was available, dark blue was less used. The sett of a typical Highland pattern of the era as shown in portraits was red with broad bands of green and/or blue, sometimes with fine-line over-checks. Oil portraiture was the province of the privileged, and "Sunday best" tartans with red grounds were commonly worn in them as a status symbol, from the early 18th century, the dye typically being made from expensive imported cochineal. Green and blue more generally predominated owing to their relative ease of production with locally available dyes, with more difficult yellow and red dyes commonly being saved for thin over-check lines (a practice that continued, e.g. in military and consequently many clan tartans, through to the 19th century – see Regimental tartans). However, even local-dyestuff blues were often over-dyed with some amount of imported indigo for a richer colour.


Union protest and Jacobite rebellion

The Treaty and Acts of Union in 1706–07, which did away with the separate Parliament of Scotland, led to Scottish Lowlanders adopting tartan in large numbers for the first time, as a symbol of protest against the union. It was worn not just by men (regardless of social class), but even influential Edinburgh ladies, well into the 1790s. By the beginning of the 18th century, there was also some demand for tartan in England, to be used for curtains, bedding, nightgowns, etc., and weavers in Norwich, Norfolk, and some other English cities were attempting to duplicate Scottish product, but were considered the lower-quality option.


The most effective fighters for Jacobitism were the supporting Scottish clans, leading to an association of tartan and Highland dress with the Jacobite cause to restore the Catholic Stuart dynasty to the throne of England, Scotland, and Ireland. This included great kilts, and trews (trousers) with great coats, all typically of tartan cloth, as well as the blue bonnet. The British parliament had considered banning the belted plaid after the Jacobite rising of 1715, but did not. Highland garb came to form something of a Jacobite uniform, even worn by Prince Charles Edward Stuart ("Bonnie Prince Charlie") himself by the mid-18th century, mostly in propaganda portraits (with inconsistent tartans) but also by eyewitness account at Culloden. By this period, sometimes a belted plaid was worn over tartan trews and jacket (in patterns that need not match).


Burt had concurred c. 1728, as did his 1818 editor Robert Jamieson, with Buchanan's much earlier 1582 observation that tartans were often in colours intended to blend into heather and other natural surroundings. This may just represent prejudices of English writers of the period, however, at least by the mid-18th century. Extant samples of Culloden-era cloth are sometimes quite colourful. One example is a pattern found on a coat (probably Jacobite) known to date to around the 1745 uprising; while it has faded to olive and navy tones, the sett is a bold one of green, blue, black, red, yellow, white, and light blue (in diminishing proportions). While an approximation of the pattern was first published in D. W. Stewart (1893), the colours and proportions were wrong; the original coat was rediscovered and re-examined in 2007. Another surviving Culloden sample, predominantly red with broad bands of blue, green, and black, and some thin over-check lines, consists of a largely intact entire plaid that belonged on one John Moir; it was donated to the National Museum of Scotland in 2019.


There is a legend that a particular still-extant tartan was used by the Jacobites as an identifier even prior to "the '15". This story can be traced to W. & A. Smith (1850) in Authenticated Tartans of the Clans and Families of Scotland, in which they claimed that a pattern they published was received from an unnamed woman then still living who in turn claimed a family tradition that the tartan dated to 1712, long before her birth, but for which there is no evidence. This hearsay tale was later repeated as if known fact by other books, e.g., Adam Frank's What Is My Tartan? in 1896, and Margaret MacDougall's 1974 revision of Robert Bain's 1938 Clans and Tartans of Scotland. Even the often credulous Innes of Learney (1938) did not believe it. The pattern in question does date to at least c. 1815–26, because it was collected by the Highland Society of London during that span. But there is no substantiated evidence of Jacobites using a consistent tartan, much less one surviving to the present.


Independent Highland Companies were re-raised from Scottish clans loyal to the Hanoverian monarchy during 1725–29. This time they wore uniform tartans of blue, black, and green, presumably with differencing over-check lines. They were all normalised to one tartan during 1725–33 (a pattern which probably does not survive to the present day). The uniform tartan appears to have changed into a new tartan, known today as Black Watch or Government, when the companies amalgamated to become the 42nd (Black Watch) regiment in 1739. (See Regimental tartan.)


Proscription and its aftermath

After the failure of the Jacobite rising of 1745, efforts to pacify the Highlands and weaken the cultural and political power of the clans led to the Dress Act 1746, part of the Act of Proscription to disarm the Highlanders. Because tartan Highland dress was so strongly symbolically linked to the militant Jacobite cause, the act – a highly political throwback to the long-abandoned sumptuary laws – banned the wearing of Highland dress by men and boys in Scotland north of the River Forth (i.e. in the Highlands), except for the landed gentry and the Highland regiments of the British Army. The law was based on 16th century bans against the wearing of traditional Irish clothing in the Kingdom of Ireland by the Dublin Castle administration. Sir Walter Scott wrote of the Dress Act: "There was knowledge of mankind in the prohibition, since it divested the Highlanders of a dress which was closely in association with their habits of Clanship and of war."


Tartans recorded shortly after the act (thus probably being patterns in use in the period before proscription) show that a general pattern was used in a wide area, with minor changes being made by individual weavers to taste. E.g., the tartan today used as the main (red) Mackintosh clan tartan, recorded by the Highland Society of London around 1815, was found in variants from Perthshire and Badenoch along the Great Glen to Loch Moy. Other such groups can be found, e.g. a Huntly-centred Murray/Sutherland/Gordon cluster analysed as clearly related by Innes of Learney (1938) – distinguished from a different Huntly/MacRae/Ross/Grant group identified by Scottish Register of Tartans and tartan researcher Peter Eslea MacDonald of Scottish Tartans Authority. But Scarlett (1990) says that "the old patterns available are too few in number to permit a detailed study of such pattern distributions" throughout the Highlands. Portraits of the era also show that tartan was increasingly made with identical or near-identical warp and weft patterns, which had not always been the case earlier, and that the tartan cloth used was of the fine twill, with even-warp-and-weft thickness, still used today for kilts.


Although the Dress Act, contrary to popular later belief, did not ban all tartan (or bagpipes, or Gaelic), and women, noblemen, and soldiers continued to wear tartan, it nevertheless effectively severed the everyday tradition of Highlanders wearing primarily tartan, as it imposed the wearing of non-Highland clothing common in the rest of Europe for two generations. (While some Highlanders defied the act, there were stiff criminal penalties.) It had a demoralising effect, and the goal of this and related measures to integrate the Highlanders into Lowland and broader British society was largely successful. By the 1770s, Highland dress seemed all but extinct. However, the act may also ironically have helped to "galvanize clan consciousness" under that suppression; Scottish clans, in romanticised form, were to come roaring back in the "clan tartans" run of the Regency (late Georgian) to Victorian period.


In the interim, Jacobite women continued using tartan profusely, for clothing (from dresses to shoes), curtains, and everyday items. While Classicism-infused portraiture of 18th-century clan nobles (often painted outside Scotland) typically showed them in tartan and "Highland" dress, much of it was loyalist regimental military stylings, the antithesis of Jacobite messaging; it foreshadowed a major shift in the politics of tartan (see § Late Georgian, below). Nevertheless, this profuse application of tartan could be seen as rebellious to some extent, with the reified Highlander becoming "a heroic and classical figure, the legatee of primitive virtues." And by the 1760s, tartan had become increasingly associated with Scotland in general, not just the Highlands, especially in the English mind.


After much outcry (as the ban applied to Jacobites and loyalists alike), the Dress Act was repealed in 1782, primarily through efforts of the Highland Society of London; the repeal bill was introduced by James Graham, Marquis of Graham (later Duke of Montrose). Some Highlanders resumed their traditional dress, but overall it had been abandoned by its former peasant wearers, taken up instead by the upper and middle classes, as a fashion. Tartan had been "culturally relocated as a picturesque ensemble or as the clothing of a hardy and effective fighting force" for the crown, not a symbol of direct rebellion. R. Martin (1988) calls this transmutation "the great bifurcation in tartan dress", the cloth being largely (forcibly) abandoned by the original Highland provincials then taken up by the military and consequently by non-Highlander civilians. During the prohibition, traditional Highland techniques of wool spinning and dyeing, and the weaving of tartan, had sharply declined. Commercial production of tartan was to become re-centred in the Lowlands, in factory villages along the fringe of the Highlands, among companies like Wilsons of Bannockburn (then the dominant manufacturer), with the rise of demand for tartan for military regimental dress. Some tartan weaving continued in the Highlands, and would even see a boost in the late Georgian period. Tartan by this era had also become popular in Lowland areas including Fife and Lothian and the urban centres of Edinburgh and Stirling. From 1797 to 1830, Wilsons were exporting large quantities of tartan (for both men's and women's clothing), first to the British colonies in Grenada and Jamaica (where the affordable, durable, and bright material was popular for clothing enslaved people), and had clients in England, Northern and Central Europe, and a bit later in North and South America and the Mediterranean. However, by the end of the 18th century, Wilsons had "stiff competition" (in civilian tartan) from English weavers in Norwich.


Because the Dress Act had not applied to the military or gentry, tartan gradually had become associated with the affluent, rather than "noble savage" Highlanders, from the late 18th century and into the 19th, along with patriotic military-influenced clothing styles in general; tartan and militarised Highland dress were being revived among the fashion-conscious across Britain, even among women with military relatives. The clans, Jacobitism, and anti-unionism (none of them any longer an actual threat of civil unrest) were increasingly viewed with a sense of nostalgia, especially after the death of Prince Charles Edward Stuart in 1788, even as Highland regiments proved their loyalty and worth. Adopting the airs of a Tory sort of tartaned "Highlandism" provided a post-union and resigned sense of national (and militarily elite) distinction from the rest of Britain, without threatening empire. Even the future George IV donned Highland regalia for a masquerade ball in 1789. By the 1790s, some of the gentry were helping design tartans for their own personal use, according to surviving records from Wilsons. Jane (Maxwell) Gordon, Duchess of Gordon, was said to have "introduced tartan to  court ... wearing a plaid of the Black Watch, to which her son had just been appointed", in 1792; she triggered a fashion of wearing tartan in London and Paris, though was not immune to caricature by the disapproving.


R. Martin (1988) wrote, from a historiographical perspective, that after the Dress Act:


the idea of Highland dress was stored in the collective historical attic; when it was revived in the years leading up to 1822, it had been forgotten by some two or three generations in civilian dress and could be remembered, however deceptively, however naively, to have been the ancient dress of the Highlands, not that so recently worn as the standard peasant dress before 1746. The ban on tartan was hugely successful, but so inimical to a natural historical process, that it promoted the violent re-assertion of the tartan, sanctioned by a spurious sense of history, in the next century.

The tumultuous events of 18th-century Scotland led to not just broader public use of tartan cloth, but two particular enduring tartan categories: regimental tartans and eventually clan tartans.


Regimental tartans

After the period of the early clan militias and the Independent Highland Companies (IHCs), over 100 battalions of line, fencible, militia, and volunteer regiments were raised, between c. 1739 and the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, in or predominantly in the Highlands, a substantial proportion of them in Highland dress. Of these units, only some had distinct uniform tartans, and of those, only a small number were recorded to the present day.


The IHCs were amalgamated in 1739 to become the 43rd (later 42nd) Regiment of Foot, called the Black Watch. It was the first proper governmental Highland regiment, part of the British Army, and they wore the belted plaid ("great kilt") for dress, and the tailored small kilt for undress uniform. For the former garment, they used a distinctive tartan, which was designed for the unit. It was originally called the "42nd tartan", so it probably was not adopted until after the unit was renumbered the 42nd in 1749. It seems likely that the tartan was based on those used by the IHCs earlier, but with double black "tram line" over-checks added. The Black Watch pattern was used by various other regiments, and it has been estimated that to clothe them all, some 30–40 miles (48–64 km) of the tartan had to be woven before 1750 alone. It became the basis of various later regimental (and eventually clan) tartans. It remains popular in general-public use under the names "Black Watch", "Government", and any of "old Campbell", "hunting Grant", or "hunting Munro", but today officially called "Government No. 1" by the military. (See illustration in § Popular designs, below.) The 42nd had separate tratans for its small kilt until c. 1814 (also used for grenadiers' belted plaids), for pipers, and for drummers.


After the Jacobite uprisings, raising a regiment in service to the king was, for many Scottish lairds, a way of rehabilitating the family name, assuring new-found loyalty to the Hanoverian crown, and currying royal favour (even regaining forfeited estates). Exempt from the Dress Act, men in these Highland regiments of the empire were given Highland dress, and the "kilts and pipes that were once considered barbaric were now seen as 'safe' nationalism" within the army. From c. 1770 onward into the 19th century, virtually all the regimental tartan was produced by the company William Wilson & Son of Bannockburn, the dominant tartan weaver. Regimental uniforms, including tartans, were left – usually within the general Black Watch-based colour scheme of black, blue, and green – to their commanders.


Some surviving early regimental tartans include:


For more detail, and an image gallery of these setts, see Regimental tartan.


By the turn of the 18th and 19th centuries, women in Scotland were especially "desirous to dress in the uniform plaids of their husbands", in particularly fine-quality cloth, according to records of Wilsons of Bannockburn. After the Highland regiments proved themselves fearless and effective in various military campaigns, the glory associated with them did much to keep alive, initially among the gentry and later the general public, an interest in tartan and kilts, which might have otherwise slipped into obscurity due to the Dress Act's prohibition. The belted plaid was abandoned in favour of the small kilt, around 1814. After the "clan tartanry" rush of the early to mid-19th century (see below), various later Highland regiments adopted some of the recently minted clan tartans for their uniforms (reversing the original regimental-into-clan-tartan flow). Some of these adoptions remain in regimental use today.


The Lowland regiments (dating in some form to 1633 and never before dressed in Highland garb but in a variant of regular army uniform) were outfitted in tartan trews in 1881. This both linked them with and distinguished them from the tartan-kilted Highland regiments. Typically the "Government" (Black Watch) tartan was used, though some units later diversified. Several Highland regiments were again assigned new tartans that were clan tartans rather than unit-specific ones, into the early 20th century.


Today, about a dozen tartans are officially used (and half a dozen more unofficially) between all of the surviving historical Scottish regiments, which have largely been amalgamated since 2006 as battalions into the Royal Regiment of Scotland, part of the Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division. These tartans are only worn in dress and pipe-band uniforms, after the practical uniform changes introduced in the early part of World War II, which did away with tartan kilts and trews in undress uniforms. (For further information on these tartans and the modern units using them, see List of tartans § UK military or government tartans.) Some military units in other countries also have their own tartans. In all, there are at least 38 documented tartans that have at one time or another been associated with regiments, though many of them also with clans.


Clan tartans

With an exception dating to 1618 and another to c. 1703–1715 (neither of which appear to have survived), it is generally regarded that tartans associated by name with Scottish clans mostly date to the early-to-mid 19th century, some few to the late 18th at the earliest, depending on how one defines "clan tartan". The belief that the clan tartans are an "ancient" system of symbolic family differentiation is pervasive, even passionate, but lacks substantive evidence even as it is overwhelmed by counter-evidence. It is what J. C. Thompson (1992) called "the Great Tartan Myth", and James D. Scarlett (1990) "the Tartan Cult". Lt.-Col. M. M. Haldane (1931) called it an assumption, which "has acquired such a formidable weight from mere reiteration" without "critical examination of evidence". Barnes & Allen (1956) observed:


There is no doubt that many 'setts' had been traditional to certain districts for centuries, but the theory that they were a sort of Clan uniform seems now to have been quite discredited.

Responding to the claim that clan tartans have "an ancient political significance", Richard Martin, curator of the Fashion Institute of Technology museum and later the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, wrote (1988): " assertion about history is wrong and can be demonstrated to be perniciously wrong". According to National Galleries of Scotland curator A. E. Haswell Miller (1956):


To sum up, the presumed heraldic or "family badge" significance of the tartan has no documentary support, and the establishment of the myth can be accounted for by a happy coincidence of the desire of the potential customers, the manufacturer and the salesman. Although the antiquity of the "clan tartans" is exaggerated, what might be termed their unofficial registration took place during the nineteenth century, and if we are prepared to accept some hundred and fifty years as sufficient to create "tradition", it may be excusable to accept the fait accompli as a pleasant – and perhaps not entirely useless – national vanity.

Highland-dress researcher and curator John Telfer Dunbar added:


The desire to give to relics of all kinds greater antiquity than they truly possess is manifold. It is a pity that tradition should be degraded in this way and the acceptance of such claims by later students has been a constant obstacle to research. The more difficult task of searching back to original sources has often been avoided in favour of easy acceptance.

Just that sort of research was performed by Peter Eslea MacDonald of the Scottish Tartans Authority, who – using every available surviving company record and sample – reconstructed and traced the history of tartan patterns from the leading weaver of the late Georgian through Edwardian eras, a company instrumental in the actual design, spread, and acceptance of clan tartans. His conclusion:


Today, books and shops dealing with Highland dress will be mainly, if not exclusively, concerned with clan tartans. They may seek to suggest that these are the actual patterns worn by the Scottish clans throughout history, up to and including the Battle of Culloden in 1746. This is not the case. The majority of the pre-1850 patterns bearing clan names can only be traced back to the early 19th century and to the famous weaving firm of William Wilson & Son of Bannockburn, near Stirling.

The notion of clan tartans has been called "an astonishingly successful marketing story" and an example of an invented tradition, though one that became very well-accepted by the clans to whom it pertained and by the weaving industry starting in 1815, as well as by the general public from around 1822 – "adopted enthusiastically by both wearer and seller alike".


Precursors of clan tartans were regionally distinctive tartans (since at least the early 18th century, perhaps even the 16th), regimental uniform tartans (from 1725 onward), and personal tartans of nobles (dating to perhaps the mid-18th century if not earlier).


Today, clan tartans are an important aspect of Scottish clans, and every clan has at least one tartan attributed to its name (some officially, some not, and in a few cases one tartan is shared between multiple clans). Clan tartans may not have actually been traditional, but they became conventional.


Long-running debate

Various writers on tartans have supported or opposed the idea of clans long using distinctive tartans as an identifying badge, interpreting the scarce evidence as suited their viewpoint. Where one saw a militia uniform, or an individual noble's plaid, another saw a clan identifier. The 19th-century Celtic scholar John Francis Campbell of Islay was certain that while tartans in general were quite old, "uniform clan tartans are no older than clan regiments", a view backed by Haldane (1931) in a series of articles in The Scots Magazine, followed by many tartan writers later.


The earliest evidence summarised below could have been more a matter of militia uniform than clan-wide dress; a distinction in that era is difficult to be certain of today, because troops then were led by landed gentry and a unit was raised largely on its commander's land from his clansmen. Such definitional uncertainty could also apply to the 1691 Grameid poem; describing what appear to be some soldierly uniform tartans, it could be reinterpreted as supporting an early notion of clan tartans, if one wanted to define that as 'what most of the men of a clan were wearing into battle'; Scarlett (1990) confirms that there has been "fiery argument" in favour of a clan tartans interpretation. However, Robert Jamieson (1818) reported that the "field dress" plaids of Highland men, for war and hunting, were different from their everyday dress – made of coarser material and using patterns intended to blend into natural surroundings, the cath dath or cath da' ('war colour'). This casts some doubt on interpretation of militia tartans as general clan tartans. Most of the later regimental uniform tartans (which did not become adopted as clan tartans until around the early 19th century or the late 18th in a few cases, when they did at all) were variations on the dark, green-based Black Watch tartan, as detailed above.


J. C. Thompson (1992) noted "a typical Victorian inclination to cite previous authors with little or no attempt to evaluate their statements .... Modern analysis cannot afford to be so uncritical." Scarlett (1990) relatedly observed:


Wishful proofs are found in profusion in the literature of tartan, early and late, and consist of stating an opinion as a fact and adding some more or less relevant historical reference in support, either implying or stating that this proves the point. That it proves nothing at all is neither here nor there, so long as the manner of the presentation is sufficiently authoritative; given this treatment the wildest theory will be accepted, copied from one book to the next and so enter tartan lore. It is almost axiomatic that the wilder the theory the more acceptable it will be ....

Even D. W. Stewart (1893), who had sometimes been sympathetic toward the idea of clan tartans existing before the 19th century, wrote:


Some ... assure us that the antiquity of the so-called clan patterns is very great, and many writers allege in general terms that these designs were used as a clan distinction from the earliest period. ... The halo of romance surrounding the Jacobite struggle inclined many, and still induces others, to accept as authentic and reliable, statements which in different circumstances would be more closely sifted. Thus it is that the tartans ... have won much favour, and those who find one represented as bearing their name accept it as their ancient clan pattern without the inconvenience of investigation, or of posing any awkward questions.

The Victorians also engaged in some imaginative invention. Aside from the outright forgery of the "Sobieski Stuarts" (see § 19th century broad adoption, below), another extreme case is Charles Rogers, who in his Social Life in Scotland (1884–86) fantastically claimed that the ancient Picts' figural designs – which were painted or tattooed on their bodies, and they went into battle nude – must have been "denoting the families or septs to which they belonged" and thus "This practice originated the tartan of Celtic clans." Another asserted that tartan was invented around a thousand years ago by Saint Margaret of Scotland.


Aside from the unreliability of early writers (and later copiers of them), part of the confusion and debate about clan tartans comes down to definitions. Sir Thomas Innes of Learney, writing in 1938 and described as "immensely keen on  codification and the importance of it", was one of the firmest proponents of the idea of very old clan tartans (in the particular sense of 'patterns consistently used for a period by certain clans', not 'patterns named for certain clans and claimed by them to the present'). He held that some setts gradually became associated with particular families (clans and septs thereof) over time; clan territories had mostly become stable by the 16th century. D. W. Stewart's 1893 reference shows various cases of old district tartans later sometimes being identified for a time with specific families before 19th-century adoption of their own (usually different) clan tartans. Innes of Learney wrote of clan tartans that (notwithstanding the unusual 1618 case covered below) "the tendency was rather to insist upon a similarity of general hue than on similarity of detail", a vague sense that is not what "clan tartan" usually refers to. He also reasoned that "it was not until about the 18th century that the clan tartans became conscious and acknowledged badges of identification". However, the surviving period source material lacks this "acknowledgement" and does not actually suggest broad adoption of formal clan tartans (with clan names, particularity of detail, and a symbolic, identifying intent) until the early 19th century.


Earliest evidence

The "Sobieski Stuarts" (1842) and later D. W. Stewart (1893) made much of some changes to the feu duty paid in woven cloth by locals of Noraboll on the island of Islay to their lords. In 1587, under the Macleans, the cloth was to be white, black, and green; in 1617, under the Mackenzies, the demanded cloth-rent changed to white, black, and grey. These writers were sure, without any further evidence, that this represented a change of clan tartans.


The only clear instance of a clan-based and specific livery tartan to an early date, rather than simply regional and later regimental uniformity, is found in a 1618 letter from Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstoun (in the employ of the Earl of Sutherland) to Murray of Pulrossie, chieftain of the Murray branch in Sutherland but subordinate to the Earl of Sutherland, chief of Clan Sutherland (in turn recently become subordinate to the Gordon earls). The letter (rediscovered in 1909) requested Pulrossie "to remove the red and white lines from the plaides of his men so as to bring their dress into harmony with that of the other septs" of Sutherland. The letter does not specify the tartan to which to conform; there have been sharply conflicting interpretations, and it is not even certain that it was a tartan that survived to the present.


A case of general colour-matching: In 1703–04, the chief of Clan Grant ordered that his "fencible" men obtain clothing in red and green tartan (vaguely described as "broad springed" but not specified in detail). The material seems not to have been provided by Grant for them in a centralised way, but left to each man to furnish by his own means (on penalty of a fine). "He did not order them to wear the 'Clan Grant Tartan', as one would expect if such a tartan existed at that time." Some of the modern Grant tartans also use red and green; one was designed by Wilsons of Bannockburn in 1819 as "New Bruce" and shortly adopted by both Grant of Redcastle and Clan Drummond; one was reconstructed from an 1838 portrait; another first appeared in the dubious Vestiarium Scoticum of 1842 (see below); and so on – none with pre-19th-century history. Nevertheless, D. W. Stewart (1893) proclaimed on this thin material that here was "a complete chain of evidence ... of the existence of a uniform clan pattern at the very start of the eighteenth century" – despite his own observation that portraits of leading members of the Grant family in this era do not show them wearing consistent tartans, much less ones that agree with modern "official" Grant tartans. Scarlett (1990), though thinking this presaged "the Clan Tartan Idea", notes that "had the men of Strathspey been accustomed to wearing uniform tartans it would not have been necessary to order them to do so" (twice over). He also observes that the lairds of Grant in this period were unusually bent on uniformity, one of them even issuing moustache regulations for clansmen; the Grant red-and-green order cannot be taken as typical of everyday Highland practice. Telfer Dunbar (1979) notes that Highland military discipline hardly existed: "To these independent Highland chieftains restraint of any kind was irksome and unbearable, and to impose any rigid military discipline on their followers ...  found to be impossible." Nevertheless, Mackay (1924) corroborates Grant militia wearing a livery tartan in 1715.


In 1718, Allan Ramsay (the writer, father of the artist by the same name) published the poem Tartana, which combined colours with Latinised family names: "... If shining red Campbella's cheeks adorn .... If lin'd with green Stuarta's Plaid we view ... Or thine Ramseia, edg'd around with blue ...." This has sometimes been taken as evidence of early clan tartans, despite possibly just referring to the edging and lining of garments (coloured facings were common on jackets of the time). Worse for this hypothesis, the Campbell tartans are predominantly green, Stuart/Stewart red, and Ramsay red and green. The extant red Campbell tartans are all modern reconstructions of patterns (that are unlike each other) from portraits; Stewart/Stuart tartans with significant green date to the early 19th century or much later; and the Ramsay blue hunting sett dates to 1950.


A Victorian volume, Old and New Edinburgh (1884) by James Grant, stated that one Rev. Joseph Robertson MacGregor "attired himself in a full suit of the MacGregor tartan" in 1782, upon repeal of the Dress Act. But it misquoted the original source (and contained other errors). The original, A Series of Original Portraits and Caricature Etchings (1842) by John Kay, read: "dressed himself in the Highland costume peculiar to his clan", and says nothing of tartan, much less a suit of clan tartan. While 1782 is within the late-18th-century range accepted by some researchers for some informal early clan tartans, this is not clear evidence of one.


Lack of further evidence of early adoption

John Lesley, bishop of Ross, in 1578 wrote a great deal about Highland customs, including dress, but did not include clan tartans (despite later being claimed to have been the original keeper of the Vestiarium Scoticum clan-tartans manuscript, now known to be a 19th-century forgery).
In 1688, William Sacheverell, a Manx politician, described Hebrideans of the Isle of Mull all wearing plaids, but the women in a different style of colour and pattern – not a consistent "clan" tartan. Rev. Thomas Morer in 1689 described Highland garb in some detail, including tartan plaids and hose (made from the same cloth), but mentions no clan patterns. Daniel Defoe (c. 1720) wrote also in considerable detail of Highland warriors of the prior century, and noted that the men were organised into "companies, all of a name", each led by "one of their own clan or family", yet he never mentions any distinction between tartans of these different groups, instead describing them all as wearing tartan with red and yellow over-checks, strongly implying a regional style. This pattern of 17th- through 18th-century writings providing specifics of tartan and Highland dress, but nothing about clan tartans, is consistent.


Contemporary portraits show that although tartan is of an early date, the pattern worn depended not on the wearer's clan, but rather regional style and personal taste. They frequently depict subjects wearing multiple tartans at once. Nor do the tartans shown match current clan tartans. For example, the famous painting The MacDonald Boys Playing Golf (1740s), attributed usually to William Mosman but sometimes to Jeremiah Davison, shows them wearing five different tartans, and they are not surviving patterns (except as later reconstructions from the painting). Period tartans were also often of differing warp and weft (giving more of a striped than checked appearance), unlike modern symmetrical patterns. Sometimes the portraits were copied, but with tartans that do not match, as if the designs were up to artistic whim. As Scarlett (1990) put it:


"hese portraits have one thing in common: in no case does the tartan shown bear any close resemblance to the modern 'Clan' tartan. ... There is a great lack of evidence to show that the pattern of a tartan had any important significance in the early eighteenth century

D. W. Stewart (1893) had also noted this, about both portrait tartans and "examples of tartan fabrics which can be proved to date from the risings of 1715 and 1745". Many of the portraits by Allan Ramsay the younger show the same shoulder plaid but with colours changed, suggesting it was the artist's own studio prop and used for modelling purposes by his clients who apparently did not care about the tartan pattern. According to Scottish National Portrait Gallery keeper A. E. Haswell Miller (1956):


Authentic documentation of the tartan previous to the 19th century is limited to a comparatively small number of contemporary portraits, and is negative so far as it provides any suggestion of heraldic significance or "clan badge" intention.

According to Trevor-Roper (1983):


contemporary evidence concerning the rebellion of 1745 – whether pictorial, sartorial, or literary – shows no
differentiation of clans, no continuity of setts.... Tartans were a matter of private taste, or necessity, only.

David Morier's well-known mid-18th-century painting of the Highland charge at the 1745 Battle of Culloden shows eight Highlanders wearing over twenty different tartans which have been analysed in detail; very few of the setts painted resemble today's clan tartans, though they are similar to existing samples of tartan cloth from the era. The method of identifying Highlander friend from foe was not through tartans but by the colour of the bonnet's cockade or ribbon, or perhaps by the different plant sprigs worn in the cockade of the bonnet. In particular, the government Highland militia forces wore a badge in the form of a black cockade with red saltire; according to Mackay Scobie (1946), "each individual wore his own Highland dress with varied tartans, with the only uniform part being the 'Hanoverian' cockade and large coloured cross on the bonnet." A 1745 letter on the Jacobite troops at Culloden describes "all ye Forces as well Horse as foot were in Highland Dress except ye body Guards wh. wore Blue bound wth Red"; i.e., only the bodyguards were wearing a uniform, and it was not of Highland dress.


One of many tartan legends has it that the Highland-dress ban of the Dress Act was enacted because tartans were used as clan-identifying symbols or uniforms, but not a trace of this idea can be found in period sources. To the contrary, Burt (1727–37) was explicit that English objection to Highland dress (since perhaps 1703–04) was general, because the garb served to distinguish the Highlanders as a people apart from the Lowlanders and other British (not distinguish Highlander from Highlander). Defoe (c. 1720) likewise mocked Highland dress as what he saw as a clownish costume that set Highlanders apart from everyone else, not each other. Similarly, in an account of Jacobite trials, it was asked whether defendants had worn "Highland cloaths" in general, with no mention of clan-identifying patterns. Extant MacDonald tartan fragments from the Battle of Culloden do not match each other or any current clan tartan named MacDonald. Lord President Duncan Forbes of Culloden, keen on punishing the Jacobites with disarmament and other penalties, wrote a detailed letter laying out pro and con points (mostly con) regarding the proposed Highland-dress ban before Parliament passed it, yet never indicated anything like clan tartans, something that would have been a key argument to address.


C. C. P. Lawson (1967) raised a point of logic: "Remembering the continuous clan feuds and the consequent state of more or less perpetual hostilities, a recognisable clan plaid would have been a positive danger to the wearer outside his own territory." This may explain why the handful of early apparent examples of groups of men in similar tartan seem to have the nature of militia uniforms and are mentioned in the context of "fencible" bodies or outright battle (possibly aside from the 1618 case). Lawson also states: "The '45 supplies no evidence that tartans were used as clan insignia .... Relics of those tartans which were worn at Culloden or of the pre-1745 period bear no resemblance to any known modern tartan." The Lord Lyon King of Arms in 1948, Sir Francis James Grant, wrote that pre-1745 tartans were qualitatively different from those of the 19th century and later. Scottish United Services Museum curator Dunbar (1979) notes this as well.


The Jacobite poets wrote much about the rousing appeal of Highland clans and Highland dress, even tartan specifically, but never mentioned clan tartans. Similarly, multiple large volumes of traditional Highland folklore were collected and published by John Francis Campbell in 1860–62 (revised 1890–93), and Alexander Carmichael (who also collected tartan samples) in 1900, but the period materials in them are devoid of any recorded references to clan tartans (despite post-dating the popularisation of the notion among city-dwellers and the upper class).


The idea of groups of men wearing the exact same tartan as an identifier is thought to originate (aside, again, from the odd 1618 case) from Highland regiment units in the 18th century, starting with the Black Watch in 1739/1749. According to Trevor-Roper (1983):


t was probably their use of it which gave birth to the idea of differentiating tartan by clans; for as the Highland regiments were multiplied ... so their tartan uniforms were differentiated; and when the wearing of tartan by civilians was resumed, and the romantic movement encouraged the cult of the clan, the same principle of differentiation was easily transferred from regiment to clan.

Particular regiments were often dominated by men raised from the same clan lands, and this may have blurred the line between regimental uniform and clan-identifying tartan. (And several tartans of extinct regiments survive today as clan tartans.) Newsome (2006) writes: "the practice of clans wearing these regimental tartans may have in fact been the inspiration for the 'clan tartan' system as we now know it." Telfer Dunbar (1979), on the idea of the early Independent Highland Companies using distinct uniform tartans: "I feel sure that here we have much of the 'clan tartan' origin." The end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th centuries brought an unprecedented level of influence of military clothing styles, including Highland regimental, on civilian attire (even for women), especially among the social elite connected to regiments. Some regimental tartans appear to have been named after their commanding officers, and this may be how they came to be associated with family/clan names over time. Banks & de La Chapelle (2007):


the notion of differentiation of tartan by clans might have evolved from this desire to distinguish on Highland regiment uniform from another. Certainly, its classification for military use laid the groundwork for many subsequent designs and the movement toward uniformity.

Scarlett (1990) also observed the connection to regional or "district" tartans:


asic patterns prevailed over wide areas and were modified by local weavers for their own ends. It can easily be seen that a local pattern of this kind, made for a captive clientele, might have become identified with the people of that locality who were themselves predominantly of one Clan or family group and its adherents and, when the belief grew up that Clan tartans had been worn since the beginning of time, have become, by retrospection, the Clan tartan of that group. There is no evidence that the Highlanders themselves looked on tartan in that light, however ....

Haswell Miller (1956) similarly noted: "We can ... readily accept that certain dyes would prevail in different regions and that traditional types of pattern might be followed in various parts." Martin Martin in 1703 had described tartans as being identifiably specific to particular regions, but not clans. There are numerous cases of tartans loosely associated with districts later becoming clan tartans. The best-documented case is the Tullibardine pattern, one of the few modern clan tartans that can be traced (at all, not as a clan tartan) to the pre-proscription period. It was long associated with Perthshire, and later adopted as the Murray of Tullibardine clan tartan, but sold by Wilsons as simply "Tullibardine" as late as c. 1830–40, and it was found for sale in a market by W. & A. Smith around 1850, who also said it was worn then by Charles Murray, Earl of Dunmore; the first record of the pattern as "Murray of Tullibardine" is in their 1850 book. It appears in at least five early portraits; four date to c. 1740–1750, the first of an unknown female sitter attributed to Cosmo Alexander, and three by Allan Ramsay (with the cloth painting completed by Joseph van Aken) which are not of any known Murrays (but of a Campbell, a MacLeod, and a MacDonald). It is not until 1770 that a known Murray is painted wearing it (John Murray, Earl of Dunmore, by Joshua Reynolds), which still does not necessarily make it a "clan tartan" at that early a date ("evidence for its historic use by that branch  is circumstantial at best"). The oldest version of it differs slightly as to colours and sett from the modern clan version.


Similarly, according to the Scottish Register of Tartans, the district tartan for Huntly, originating in more complex form as the personal tartan of a Marchioness of Huntly (probably Henrietta Mordaunt), was in use as a regional tartan since at least "the '45", and worn at Culloden by clansmen of Brodie, Forbes, Gordon, MacRae, Munro, and Ross, "which gives a strong indication of the greater antiquity of the 'District' setts compared to the Clan tartans."


Some surviving early records of tartan manufacture are those of the Orphan Hospital Manufactory and Paul's Work, in Edinburgh, for the period 1734–37 and 1751–52; tartans were not named but given numeric designations such as "No. 2nd". In 1745, the Caledonian Mercury of Edinburgh carried an advertisement for a "Great Choice of Tartans, the newest Patterns" – not clan or even district tartans, but newly devised ones, suggesting a fashion market driven by novelty not supposed "heraldic" traditions. Even clan-tartans booster D. W. Stewart (1893) conceded: "This advertisement, it may be urged, is a stumbling-block in the way of those who argue for the antiquity of clan patterns; for it seems peculiar that, when the city was filled with Highlanders of all ranks and many clans, they should be offered not their ancient setts ...." Other advertisements for tartan from 1745 to the early 19th century did not mention clans, or focus on the patterns at all, but rather on the forms in which the cloth could be ordered. Even immediately after the repeal of the Dress Act in 1782, the demand was for "latest patterns and bright colours", with no hint of a family heraldry aspect.


William Wilson & Son of Bannockburn, just south of the dividing line between the Highlands and Lowlands, were the first large-scale commercial tartan producers; founded c. 1765, they had become the foremost supplier of tartan to the military by around 1770, and the dominant tartan weaver in general. It was an endeavor that required the introduction of tartan recording, of standardisation of setts and dyes, and of consistency and quality control. Wilsons corresponded with their agents (especially the son, James Wilson) in the Highlands to get information and samples of cloth from the various districts to enable them to reproduce "perfectly genuine patterns". Wilsons recorded over 200 setts in addition to ones they designed in-house, collected in their 1819 Key Pattern Book of around 250 setts (among earlier in-house volumes to the 1770s). These tartans were numbered, named after places, or given fanciful names such as "Rob Roy", later sometimes family names (after prominent members), sometimes foreign names like "Coburg", but usually not those of clans, nor, when they did, often matching present clan patterns. A large proportion of the modern clan tartans, however, can be traced to this work – just often originally with numbers or unrelated names. The evidence of direct adoption from Wilsons happening frequently completely overwhelms "ancient clan tartans" sentiment.


The Scottish National Dictionary, in providing an unusually discursive definition of tartan, includes: "owards the end of the 18th century and largely through the enterprise of Messrs Wilson, weavers in Bannockburn, a series of tartans, each ascribed to a certain clan, was devised and is now accepted as authoritative, though almost entirely unhistorical." Analysing the direct and strong influence of Wilsons' Key Pattern Book (KPB) on the later adoption of clan tartans (see next section), Eslea MacDonald (2012) concluded:


Some of the 1819 KPB setts no longer retain their original names, others were altered or were the basis for a number of variations which were named or simply numbered .... Whatever their origins, these patterns gave rise to the idea of clan tartans as we know them today. In a very few cases a pattern's origins may have indeed been a lot older than the 1819 KPB but their contemporary names were almost always the work of Wilsons or subsequent writers.

The Cockburn Collection of 56 tartan samples (some of them duplicates) was put together between 1810 and c. 1825 (most likely 1816–25) by Lt.-Gen. Sir William Cockburn, and is now in the Mitchell Library in Glasgow. This collection does ascribe particular family names to many of these setts (probably naming them after prominent individuals), but only sometimes corresponding to current clan tartan associations (indeed, some patterns that are today associated with particular clans were given multiple different names in the Cockburn Collection). There are many conflicts in name-to-pattern associations between this collection and that of the Highland Society of London around the same time.


Even David Stewart of Garth, who was to become one of the chief proponents of the idea of clan tartans, observed in 1814 only that various heads of families seemed to have selected personal tartans and that there were also district tartans. When Garth and his Highland Society of London solicited clan tartans from chiefs in 1815 (see below), Col. Alexander Robertson of Struan, Chief of Clan Robertson/Donnachaidh/Duncan, wrote back:


It does not appear to be appertained, either by tradition or by authentick history, that the different Clans in the Highlands of Scotland, wore any distinctive pattern or tartan. It is well known that they all had particular Colours, or Standards, emblematical of some of their most honourable attachments, but as far as I have been able to discover, they wore no uniform Garb.

At the beginning of the 19th century, a letter from an Inverness tailor to Wilsons of Bannockburn requested fine tartan cloth to be used for women's clothing, because the fashion was to wear husbands' regimental tartans (not clan tartans). In 1829, responding negatively to the idea of Lowland and Borders "clans" wearing their own tartans, Sir Walter Scott – who was instrumental in helping start the clan-tartans fervour in the first place – wrote "where had slept this universal custom that nowhere, unless in this MS.  is it even heard of? ... I would rather suppose that the author had been some tartan-weaver zealous for his craft, who wished to extend the use of tartan over the whole kingdom." Also in the same year, he wrote: "The idea of distinguishing the clans by their tartans is but a fashion of modern date in the Highlands themselves".


Another of the tartan legends has it that Alexander Gordon, 4th Duke of Gordon, commissioned the design of a clan tartan based on Black Watch in 1793, kept one of three designs, then passed the other two on to cadet branches of the family. This tale can be traced in unembellished form to 1793 records of weaver William Forsyth of Huntly which do not say this at all, only that Forsyth provided three potential designs for a regiment tartan, with yellow over-checks in various configurations, of which the Duke selected no. 2 for the unit, the 92nd Gordon Highlanders.


Scarlett (1990) surmises that there must have been some informal clan tartans – a confluence of district tartans that had become associated with particular families, and adoptions of regimental uniform tartans by them – by the late 18th century, otherwise there is no explanation for where Stewart of Garth got the idea. Scottish United Services Museum curator Maj. I. H. Mackay Scobie (1942), Haswell Miller (1947), and Barnes & Allen (1956), also zeroed in on this timeframe. Eslea MacDonald (2010-11) observes, for example, the Murrays using the common Tullibardine regional pattern in portraits and in bed hangings at their clan seat, Blair Castle, 1770 – c. 1780 and possibly earlier. Telfer Dunbar (1979), considering the 1703–04 Grant proclamation and the early regiments, suggests that "any uniformity of tartan was only to be found in an organised body of troops, or the 'tail' or following of a chief." These possible comparatively early, informal clan tartans of the late-18th-century simply cannot usually be identified (when they survived) until the early 19th century.


19th century broad adoption

It has been suggested by a modern chief of Clan Campbell and another of the clan executives that the clan had informally adopted what is now known as old Campbell or Black Watch tartan by the early 19th century, because so many of their men were already wearing it as part of regimental uniform (three of the Independent Highland Companies that amalgamated into the Black Watch regiment in 1739–1751 were Campbell units). Some time in or after 1806, when he became clan chief, the city-dwelling politician George Campbell, 6th Duke of Argyll, created his own personal tartan, of Black Watch with a thin over-check of white and yellow added, "to differentiate himself from the rest of the Campbells", i.e. because they were already so often wearing Black Watch. This essentially may have been one of the earliest attested surviving clan tartans (and the duke's variant was an early declared personal tartan of a noble).


The idea arose among Scottish expatriates (especially in the Celtic societies, which encouraged members to wear "appropriate" tartans), eager to "preserve" Highland culture, that tartans had traditionally been named and that the names represented clan affiliations. Among them was Maj.-Gen. David Stewart of Garth, a Black Watch veteran and vice-president of the Highland Society of London (founded 1778). He and fellow members Sir John Sinclair and Andrew Robertson were among the first proponents of the idea of clans being identified by tartans, despite the lack of evidence. The society also counted among its members the Prince of Wales (the future George IV, who was to become instrumental to clan "tartanry" in 1822) and two dukes, among various itinerant actual Scots – including James Macpherson of "Ossian" fame (or infamy).


On 8 April 1815, the society resolved that the clan chiefs each "be respectfully solicited to furnish the Society with as much of the Tartan of his Lordship's Clan as will serve to Show the Pattern and to Authenticate the Same by Attaching Thereunto a Card bearing the Impression of his Lordship's Arms." Many had no idea of what their tartan might be or whether they had one, some provided only a vague description, and some claimed they had none. But plenty were keen to comply and to provide authentic signed and sealed samples; many (possibly most) turned to Wilsons of Bannockburn for a design, while some directly adopted a regimental tartan as their own, and still others adapted designs from old portraits of clan nobles. Alexander Wentworth Macdonald, Baron Macdonald, wrote back to the society: "Being really ignorant of what is exactly The Macdonald Tartan, I request you will have the goodness to exert every Means in your power to Obtain a perfectly genuine Pattern, Such as Will Warrant me in Authenticating it with my Arms." Finding no agreement within his clan on a pattern, Robertson of Struan ended up adopting the regimental tartan of the Loyal Clan Donnachie (Robertson) Volunteers; being based on the Black Watch pattern, it could not pre-date the late 18th century. On the other hand, Sir John Macgregor Murray of Clan Gregor, who had spent most of his life in England and India, was writing instructions on the use of his clan's tartan by December 1818. In 1819, Wilsons were engaged in correspondence to "send ... specimens of all coloured Tartans used by these Clans ...said to exceed thirty in number", to a writer in Italy preparing a book on clan tartans; the same year, they also produced their Key Pattern Book of over 200 tartans (representing only a fraction of their total tartan output, presumably the most marketable designs, and not always under the same names as found in contemporary collections of Wilsons' tartan samples such as the Cockburn collection and that of the Highland Society).


According to Trevor-Roper (1983), Wilsons were in a direct "alliance" with the Highland Society of London by 1819; the former saw a great marketing opportunity, and the latter provided a veneer of respectability as Wilsons helped the society pin tartans to clan names. Banks & de La Chapelle (2007) concur: "The Wilson firm worked in tandem with the Highland Society, preparing tartan samples for the latter to certify as belonging to one clan or another." Clan nobles (who sometimes contradicted each other, within the same clan, on what their tartan was or should be) were apparently also "ready to adopt changes at the mere dictation of fancy" to improve designs. From the "authentications" they received 1815–26, the society built up a clan-tartan collection (now in the National Museum of Scotland), with 34 authenticated specimens and about 40 others. Other such societies generated more interest, belief, and demand. According to the analysis by Eslea MacDonald (2012), "Most of the pieces sealed  and deposited with the Society at that time were patterns woven, and in the majority of cases appear to have been designed, by Wilsons. This obviously means they could not have existed prior to c1765 when William Wilson started his business." So many of Wilsons' stock tartans from their Key Pattern Book of 1819 were being renamed for clans that J. C. Thompson (1992) wrote: "Clearly the naming of tartans was just getting started in 1819", and: "There was nothing people wanted more than an ancient clan tartan system, and they were determined to have one." By 1821, advertisements for tartan cloth had shifted to include language like "true", "warranted", and "original", and began to stress antiquity and family connections.


The 1822 visit of George IV to Scotland, in Highland garb and with a great deal of tartan-festooned public ceremony (arranged by Stewart of Garth and romanticist writer Sir Walter Scott of the Celtic Society of Edinburgh), had a profound tartan-boosting effect, including the invention of new clan-specific tartans to suit (or renaming of old tartans to have clan names), as clan chiefs had been asked to attend in clan tartans. It caused a boom in the tartan-weaving business, and a broader public notion that tartans should be named for families. "When these two  stage-managed the King's visit ... they fixed the Clan Tartan idea in the public mind." Wilsons' pattern book in 1822 had expanded significantly with tartans named for clans, in addition to all their numbered setts. According to R. Martin (1988), Wilsons and other weavers were made aware of the king's planned visit three or four years in advance, and had all that time to pad their catalogues with additional designs and to assign clan names to patterns often "probably picked entirely out of the air." He added that "anyone looking at the tartan pattern books of 1819 to 1822 would have realized the cacophony of different names for the same , the chaos of clan attributions, and the complete capriciousness of that association." A telling letter from a tailor, archived among the Wilsons papers, to the company in 1822 asked: "Please send me a piece of Rose tartan, and if there isn't one, please send me a different pattern and call it Rose."


By 1824, an invitation to the Atholl Gathering, one of the earliest of the modern Highland games festivals, made it clear that participants should arrive "in the plaids or Tartans of their Clans". In 1829, Sir Thomas Dick Lauder complained to Walter Scott about all the "uncouth, spurious, modern  which are every day manufactured, christened after particular names, and worn as genuine", and also of "clans ... at this moment ignorantly disputing for the right to the same tartans which in fact belong to none of them but are merely modern inventions for clothing Regimental Highlanders". Scott himself was backpedalling away from what he had helped create, and was suspicious of the recent claims about "ancient" clan tartans: "it has been the bane of Scottish literature and disgrace of her antiquities, that we have manifested an eager propensity to believe without inquiry and propagate the errors which we adopt too hastily ourselves."


A wave of highly dubious books were published, all purporting to reveal true clan histories and tartans; they presented little in the way of evidence, but they caused enthusiastic adoption of clan tartans. The first of these, in 1831, was The Scottish Gaël or Celtic Manners, as Preserved Among the Highlanders by James Logan, containing 54 tartans (based on Wilsons' collection, that of the Highland Society of London, and other sources he alleged but did not name, plus some he collected or devised himself); the author ignored advice from Wilsons on which were actually old tartans, and included some erroneous, fictitious, and incomplete setts. He also included untenable assertions about the designs' antiquity; "Logan took the line that everything Highland was rooted impossibly far in the past", and was mocked in The Pall Mall Gazette for it. Meanwhile, Wilsons and other weavers simply adopted some patterns from his book due to demand, and also took to inventing all-new "clan tartans" to keep up with the growing market for patterns associated with names. The archived correspondence of Wilsons in the 1830s shows that the company was frequently pressured by merchants for the "truest" and "real" clan patterns. Logan, despite himself being involved in sham clan tartanry, observed that "fanciful varieties of tartan ... were being passed off as genuine" by Wilsons and other weavers.


Logan was followed in 1842 by Vestiarium Scoticum by the so-called Sobieski Stuarts, purporting to contain 75 centuries-old clan tartans, illustrated in great detail but from vague textual descriptions. Although it is now known to have been largely a forgery, many of the visual tartan designs in this "final – and fantastic – codification" of clan tartans were nevertheless adopted and still survive as accepted tartans of clans, especially for Lowland clan names (which had hitherto never been associated with tartan or Highland garb at all). Starting in 1822, Borders families had been redefining themselves as clans, and the book encouraged more of them to take on clan tartans and open clan societies. Modern critics have even praised the lasting socio-cultural accomplishement of the Sobieski-Stuarts' works in helping establish a systemic clan-tartans legend while recognizing the bogus nature of their material.


(The socio-political background of these events and their overall impact on tartan in general are presented at § Late Georgian and § Victorian, below.)


Trevor-Roper (1983) believed that the Sobieski Stuarts had been in direct communication with manufacturers like Wilsons, and were advising clan chiefs on which tartans to choose, from as early as 1819; J. C. Thompson (1992) agreed. Dick Lauder certainly said they were doing so by 1829, and that Wilsons were already weaving many Sobieski Stuart samples by that year; the company's own records the same year confirm orders for designs from the Sobieski Stuarts. Vestiarium was followed soon after by The Costume of the Clans published by the Sobieski Stuarts in 1845; the illustrations it provided, allegedly based on portraits, have proven to be largely a mixture of error and invention. By 1849, John Sobieski Stuart was in discussion with a publisher to produce a new, cheaper edition of Vestiarium, in a series of small volumes "so that it might be rendered as available as possible to manufacturers and the trades in general concerned in Tartan ... and it was for the advantage and use ... that I consented to the publication." The same letter also proposed binding the manufacturers by contract to produce tartans that conformed exactly to the Sobieski Stuarts' specifications.


Weavers like Wilsons were complicit, not passive, in the tartan boom. They had lost much of their military and export markets after major wars ended and colonies in the Americas and elsewhere had become more self-sufficient. "The concept of differentiated clan tartans, newly popularized, was codified and developed by canny manufacturers .... Since the repeal of the , these tartan makers saw the prospect of a vast new market." According to Alastair Campbell of Airds:


One factor which has been decisive throughout the history of the development of the modern system  has been the influence of the tartan manufacturers .... As with any marketing organisation it was important to maintain a steady flow of "new products", and every year new patterns were produced .... The idea of individual tartans providing a clan or family identity was a most attractive one, which was adopted enthusiastically by both wearer and seller alike.

This heavy promotion for decades of the clan-tartans idea has been described as "inciting a rush to lay claim to the tartan to which one's family was 'entitled'". Other 19th-century clan-tartan works followed. Logan (by then president of the Highland Society of London) returned, with illustrator Robert Ranald McIan, with The Clans of the Scottish Highlands in several volumes 1843–1849, which had inconsistently hand-coloured portraits of chiefs in clan tartans, which he stated were "acknowledged by the present chiefs and clans". The Clans of the Highlands of Scotland in 1850 by Thomas Smibert drew heavily on Wilsons' patterns and on Logan. In the same year, Authenticated Tartans of the Clans and Families of Scotland by William & Andrew Smith was based on trade sources such as Wilsons, competing mill Romanes & Paterson of Edinburgh, and army clothier George Hunter's pre-1822 collection of setts (and some consultation with historian W. F. Skene). Also in 1850, Gen. James Browne published History of the Highlands and the Highland Clans, another Vestiarium knock-off.


In 1871, Gaelic folklorist and Highland dress fancier John Francis Campbell of Islay wrote in Clan Tartans:


I have come to the conclusion that Sir Walter Scott and my friends the Editors of the Vestiarium Scoticum and Scotch Manufacturers of tartans are together responsible for the present flourishing and luxuriant crop of brilliant clan tartans .... I do not believe that the distinctions which are now made as to Clan Tartans ever prevailed at all, till Tartan became an important manufacture in Scotland in the reign of George the 4th

J. Claude produced the tartan pattern sample book Clans Originaux in Paris c. 1880, and some tartans were adopted from it, though its 185 samples were mostly of already-known tartans. A second edition of The Costume of the Clans was published in 1892. Another influential book was Donald W. Stewart's Old & Rare Scottish Tartans (1893), which included swatches of fabric; several accepted clan tartans date to this work.


Books of this era also introduced lists of alleged clan septs, families of different surnames (often of English, Norman, or other non-Gaelic derivation) supposedly linked to particular clans as "extended family". It was a means of greatly increasing tartan sales by attaching many more names to extant tartan designs, but not well-grounded in any historical reality. Two such works, both published by W. & A. K. Johnston were: Tartans of the Clans and Septs of Scotland by James Grant in 1886, revised by Henry Whyte in 1906 in more of a picture-book format (three tartans make their first appearance in the 1886 edition, and various more in the 1906 version, with no provenance); and What Is My Tartan? or, The Clans of Scotland, with Their Septs and Dependents by Adam Frank in 1896.


The romanticised notion of clan tartans had become deeply embedded in the Scottish imagination and further afield. "t all got mixed up in the public mind and the myth of tartan as a kind of heraldry became established, not only in the eyes of outsiders, even the Clansfolk believed it". On the cusp of the Scottish Renaissance and Gaelic Revival, most clans (including major Lowland families) had been assigned and had generally accepted one or more tartans by the late 19th century.


20th century consolidation

The first Edwardian book on the subject (aside from a larger 1906 "library edition" of Whyte as The Scottish Clans and Their Tartans with Notes), was Frank Adam's 1908 The Clans, Septs & Regiments of the Scottish Highlands, which remains in print today (though in drastically edited form, by Sir Thomas Innes of Learney). A variety of books, with colour plates, had been affordably and widely published about clan tartans by the mid-20th century. Three popular ones were The Clans and Tartans of Scotland by Robert Bain, 1938 (the first to use photographic halftone prints; revised and updated many times through 1983); The Tartans of the Clans and Families of Scotland by Innes of Learney (later to become the Lord Lyon King of Arms as well as a founder of the Scottish Tartans Society), 1938, advancing some clan-tartanry ideas his Lord Lyon predecessor Sir Francis James Grant considered "humbug"; and The Scottish Clans & Their Tartans published by W. & A. K. Johnston, 1945 (later editions re-titled The Scottish Tartans with Historical Sketches, edited by Innes of Learney), and based on previous works by Grant and Whyte. Many others followed in successive decades.


The mass-market books (some with over 200 tartans illustrated) did much to cement the idea of clan tartans in the public imagination, as well as to consistently anchor particular tartans to particular clans. And the works were in more general agreement with one another than had been the Victorian "authorities". They also simultaneously increased the number of clans with their own assigned tartans, and reduced the number of tartans claimed to be those of certain clans to a more manageable number, probably after consultation with clan chiefs and clan society officers. They did, however, typically include sept lists, which today are widely regarded as bogus (though many present-day clan associations still use them, as a means of attracting larger membership).


Almost every extant clan (with or without a chief) had at least one tartan associated with it by this era. Many clans have several well-accepted tartans. Sometimes they represent different branches of the family; e.g., there are separate tartans for Campbell of Breadalbane, Campbell of Cawdor, and Campbell of Loudoun, in addition to the general "old" Campbell tartan. In other cases, they are (at least ostensibly) for specific purposes such as hunting, mourning, formal dress occasions, or Highland dance competition; e.g., the MacFarlane dress and hunting tartans are different. (See § Tartans for specific purposes, below.)


An important, more scholarly work was 1950's The Setts of the Scottish Tartans by Donald C. Stewart (son of the aforementioned D. W. Stewart). The younger Stewart has been hailed as "the founder of serious tartan research"; originated now-standard methods for indexing tartans; and would go on to help expose the Vestiarium Scoticum as a fraud, in Scotland's Forged Tartans, co-authored with J. Charles Thompson in 1980.


In the late 20th century to present, clan and other tartans also have been catalogued in databases. (See § Registration, below.) A small number of new official clan tartans (mostly specific-purpose "side" tartans, like dance tartans) were registered in tartan databases in the 21st century.


Regarding modern misrepresentations of clan tartans on historical figures in films and even museums, Scarlett (1990) wrote: "so widely have the tartan myths been spread that any script- or guide-book writer will, in complete ignorance, write the most arrant nonsense and never think that it might not be true. ... Once false information has been disseminated by a supposedly authoritative body it is virtually impossible to correct it."


Recognition by clan chiefs

The "officialness" of clan tartans has varied widely, and still does today. Although it is possible for anyone to create a tartan and assign it any name they wish, the only person with the authority to make a clan's tartan "official" is the chief.


Some clans have had no chiefs for some time, while only a majority subset of those with living chiefs in the modern era made direct proclamations as to their clan tartans and registered them with the Lord Lyon. Some time after the launch of the Scottish Register of Tartans (SRT) in 2009, the Lord Lyon stopped recording clan tartans, deferring to SRT for this purpose. (See § Registration, below.) Some of the clan tartans were simply adopted by custom, and have remained rather consistent into the 21st century. A clan booth at a Highland games event is likely to proudly display at least their best-known clan tartan, regardless whether a chief has declared it official.


However, some chiefs have been quite adamant about what their clan's legitimate tartans are. Some time prior to 1890, George Campbell, 8th Duke of Argyll, chief of Clan Campbell, is said to have specified the main Campbell tartan, as distinct from that of the Campbell of Cawdor sett, after a portrait had depicted him in the latter and also supposedly at the prompting of the War Office, perhaps with regard to Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders uniforms. Ian Campbell, 12th Duke of Argyll, Clan Campbell chief in the late 20th century, excoriated attempts to claim there were other than the four aforementioned particular Campbell tartans (and specifically rejected the personal-variant tartan of the 6th Duke). Similarly, Sir Malcolm MacGregor, chief of Clan Gregor, wrote in 2012 that only four MacGregor tartans (plus a newer dance tartan) are legitimate, out of 10 or more alleged ones found in a tartan database, which he blamed on "indiscriminate commercialisation ... disingenuous and lead to confusion".


In at least one instance, a clan tartan appears in the coat of arms of a clan chief and is considered by the Lord Lyon as the "proper" tartan of the clan: The crest of the chief of Clan MacLennan is A demi-piper all Proper, garbed in the proper tartan of the Clan Maclennan.


Some chief-authenticated clan tartans are quite late arrivals. In 1961, the Clan Davidson main tartan was replaced (and registered with the Lord Lyon) by one of multiple disputed chiefs, Sir David Davidson of Allt Dinnie, with a design dating to 1893, in place of an older white-striped version. Chief Charles Shaw of Tordarroch in 1971 replaced the old Shaw tartan (a Black Watch variant based on a misprinted image in Logan & McIan (1847)) with a new pair (dress and hunting) designed in 1969 by D. C. Stewart based on more historical sources. Clan Mar had no approved tartan until Chief Margaret of Mar registered one in 1978 (from a design that may pre-date 1850); their dress/red tartan was not adopted until 1992 (from a design dating to the 18th century). The MacLeod red tartan was approved by Chief John MacLeod of MacLeod in 1982, to join much longer-standing yellow and blue tartans of the clan; it was based loosely on what appears in a 1748 portrait of Chief Norman MacLeod by Allan Ramsay and Joseph van Aken. Baron David Lumsden of Cushnie-Lumsden in 1996 approved the Clan Lumsden hunting sett by Peter Eslea MacDonald (though technically the baron was just the chieftain of the Cushnie-Lumsden branch). In 1998, Chief Dugald MacTavish of Dunardry approved a 1958 design as the MacTavish dress tartan. In 2005, Chief Gillem Lumsden of that Ilk registered a new main Lumsden tartan with the Lord Lyon, based closely on that of a c. 1790 Lumsden family waistcoat. Also in 2005, a pattern for Duncan of Sketraw was approved by Chieftain John Duncan of Sketraw, based on a 1930s design. In 2007, Chief Fergus D. H. Macdowall of Garthland designed the Clan MacDowall tartan (the clan previously used MacDougall or Galloway district); he registered it with the Lord Lyon and Scottish Tartans Authority in 2008. The Cochrane hunting tartan was designed personally by Chief Iain A. D. B. Cochrane, Earl of Dundonald, in 2008. The Clan Carruthers tartan was approved by Chief Simon Peter Carruthers of Holmains in 2017.


Modern general use

Aside from regimental and clan usage, tartan has seen broad (and sometimes highly politicised) use by the general public in the modern era. By the 19th century, the Highland romantic revival, inspired by James Macpherson's "Ossian" poems and the writings of Sir Walter Scott, led to wider interest in tartan and other things felt to be Gaelic and Celtic. Clubs like the Celtic societies welcomed Lowlanders, and tartan was rapidly appropriated as part of the Scottish national identity (and part of broader British dress as a familiar exoticism).


Late Georgian

The period of widened public interest in tartan and Highland dress after the repeal of the Dress Act in 1782 has been called the Highland Revival. While tartan had already seen more nationwide use from 1707, as a Scottish nationalism symbol against union with England, it was turned on its ear to become a romanticised symbol of union loyalism in the early 19th century, an era in which prominent conflicts caused a patriotic influence of military (including Highland) style on civilian clothing, even among women despite its overtly masculine focus. First among the northern gentry and later among the common people more broadly, there was a renewed interest in tartan and Highland dress, despite the long period of prohibition – largely due to the glory associated with the Highland regiments' exemplary service in various military campaigns. "Highlandism" became a romantic, mythologised (even fictionalised) and colourful escapism even as Lowland Scotland itself was becoming one of the most industrialised places on earth, and the entire nation was undergoing the social upheavals of union and empire, of large-scale warfare, of urbanisation, and of modernisation during the Scottish Enlightenment. The bloody French Revolution of 1789–1799 had also helped inspire a British setting aside of old Stuart and Hanoverian rivalry.


Before the clan tartans rush began in 1815, tartan was already being aggressively marketed to the general public as "fancy" cloth with names that commemorated famous events and people, even fictional characters from books and songs, e.g. "Waterloo", "Flora MacDonald", "Sir Walter Scott", "Wellington", "Maggie Lauder", and "Meg Merrilees". This inspired a novel perception that tartans should be named. Some of the designs by leading weaver Wilsons of Bannockburn by this period were considered recognisable on sight.


In 1822, Maj.-Gen. David Stewart of Garth, who was with both the Highland Society of London and the Celtic Society of Edinburgh, published Sketches of the Character, Manners, and Present State of the Highlanders of Scotland, the first of a number of 19th-century books lionising the Highlanders, the clans, and the tartaned regiments. The various Celtic/Highland societies throughout Britain had already been driving a rise in tartan demand since the late 18th century. The societies liked wearing Highland dress – in their own assimilated, urban idiom, such as tartan frock coats – and devising new tartans; it has been suggested that they were engaging in a sort of "internal colonisation", imposing what they wanted to see rather than simply recording what was traditionally Highland. Aside from tartan fabric's increasing use in non-Highland styles of clothing, Highland dress itself had already become highly stylised, quite removed from the simplicity of its peasant origins; this was a trend that would continue throughout the later Victorian period.


The King's jaunt in tartan

The popularity of tartan was greatly increased by the royal visit of King George IV of the United Kingdom to Edinburgh in 1822, with other nobles including Lord Mayor of London Sir William Curtis, in Highland garb. George was the first reigning monarch to visit Scotland in 171 years. The pageantry invented for the event, which was nicknamed "the King's Jaunt", brought a sudden consumer-driven demand for tartan cloth and made it the national dress of the whole of Scotland. The 21 days of festivities were organised by the Jacobitism-romanticising but staunchly unionist Walter Scott, who was another co-founder of the Celtic Society of Edinburgh, and military officer David Stewart of Garth. They urged Scots (most of whom were Lowlanders) to attend "all plaided and plumed in their tartan array" in "complete national costume". One contemporary writer sarcastically described the pomp that surrounded the celebrations as "Sir Walter's Celtified Pageantry", and another as a "plaided panorama". Clan chiefs, expected to be kilted, had little choice but to take the event seriously, and arrived to show their loyalty in something of a panic, with tartaned retinues of half a dozen to up to 50 per clan (equipped at great expense, and with only about a month's official notice), in a city overflowing with Highlanders, Lowlanders, and English spectators decked in tartan, a sight that Scott's own son-in-law and biographer John Gibson Lockhart called a "Celtic hallucination". Thousands of spectators attended the many events arranged for the visit. The formal ball, reserved for the gentry, required Highland dress for admittance, and some 300 tailors were employed to supply it.


The royal endorsement of tartan and Highland-wear did much to erase any lingering association of them with the servile peasant class of the Highlands (or the region's bands of mountain bandits, for that matter). Because Scott had become "the acknowledged preserver of Scotland's past" through his historical novels, the legend he helped create of tartan and Highland dress as a Scotland-wide tradition rooted in antiquity was widely and quickly accepted, despite its ignoring and erasing of cultural diversity within the country (of Gaels, Norse–Gaels, Scoto-Normans, and Lowlanders of largely Anglo-Saxon extraction). "A bogus tartan caricature of  had been drawn and accepted, even by those who mocked it, and it would develop in perspective and colour." George IV's visit – which was not just theatrical but thoroughly political, in marrying Hanoverian power and loyalty to Stuart ideology and pride – has been described in by Angus Calder (1994) as the catalyst by which "a Union of practical convenience became a Union of irrational love and fears, sublimated in militarism, tartanry, royalism and, eventually imperialism". R. Martin (1988) added: "it would seem that this visit presages the acts of orchestrated political propaganda that we have come to know very well in the 20th century."


Following the royal visit, the tartan industry boomed, and the number of available tartans increased tenfold; in 1822, Wilsons' pattern book had numbered setts in the hundreds, and introduced many more with proper names. Scarlett (1990) writes that "Tartan was no longer the dress of northern barbarians or political dissidents; it had become respectable and the garb of loyal subjects." Books which documented tartans began to appear and added to the "tartanry" craze. James Logan's romanticised work The Scottish Gaël (1831) was the first such publication, and led the weaving industry to adopt new patterns, even Logan's invented or erroneous ones.


The result of these flurries of attention has been described as an "astonishing frenzy of excitement into which  threw the citizens of Edinburgh and much of the rest of Scotland".


Civilian spread

From the 1820s, Georgian and then Victorian portraiture of clan nobles continued the earlier theme of regimentally re-styled Highland dress, with jewels, gold, and other symbols of aristocracy – a "synthetic Gaelicism". The funerals of Sir John Macgregor Murray and Alasdair Ranaldson Macdonell of Glengarry, in 1822 and 1823 respectively, were marked by tartan, bagpipes, and "wailing" of clansmen – "a feudal sight in an increasingly industrial age". A large public tartan affair was the 1824 Atholl Gathering (an annual event that, after a period of abeyance, continues to the present). From the end of proscription through the Georgian promotion, "distrust of the Highlands became fascination", and tartan and Highland garb "moved from the periphery to the very center, accompanied by all the processes of forgetting and imaginative re-creation". Tartan, no longer the everyday traditional dress of Highland "barbarians", had become, in altered form, all the rage among the Scottish upper and even middle classes as formal attire. This popularisation of tartan increased its marketability in the Lowlands, in England, and in the colonies, and provided a boost to the Scottish textile industry.


Tartan had begun making appearances in civilian Georgian fashion throughout Britain and into continental Europe, as illustrated in publications such as London's Gallery of Fashion (1787) and La Belle Assemblée (1808), and (after Paris was famously occupied by Highland regiments during the Waterloo campaign and the fall of Napoleon in 1815) in the French periodicals Le Prétexte (1815) and Costumes Parisiens (1826); tartan was in vogue in Paris in particular in this period, and approximations of Highland soldiers even appeared in Parisian plays at the time. Tartans associated with family names became popular, but there was also a brisk trade in new tartans commissioned for societies, to commemorate events, in honour of famous persons, and designed simply to personal aesthetic taste. Manufacturers struggled to keep up with demand. By 1819, dominant tartan weaver Wilsons of Bannockburn (also a carpet and ribbon weaver) was keenly interested in exploiting the civilian market, due to a reduction in regimental demand, and introduced many more patterns, providing cloth in various grades. By 1820, the company had access to 132 looms; they experienced a four-fold increase in output in 1821, leading up to George IV's visit, after which they acquired 40 more looms in an add-on building, named the Royal George after the king, and expanded into a new mill in 1822, mechanising more and more to keep up with demand. They stopped weaving muslin to focus on tartan, and produced it in a range of qualities from finest merino wool to cheap linsey-woolsey blends, demonstrating that whatever high-class associations tartan had taken on, there was significant working-class demand. In 1829, a merchant wrote to Wilsons that "We are like to be torn to pieces for tartan; the demand is so great we cannot supply our customers", and there was great demand for the newest patterns.


Georgian and later Victorian entrepreneurs not only created new tartans, but new tartan objects called tartanware, starting as far back as the proscription period in the form of wine glasses decorated with tartan and enamel Jacobite portraits. Tartan decorated an assortment of common household objects, such as snuffboxes, jewellery cases, tableware, sewing accessories, desk items, and even doorknobs and furniture – a tartan knick-knack market for tourists that continues through the present in the Highlands. Visitors to the Highlands went home with tartanware, and Scotland-based businesses sent tartanware out as gifts to customers. Some of the more popular tartans used were the Stewart, MacDonald, MacGregor, MacDuff, MacBeth, and one fancifully named "Prince Charlie". Today, tartanware is widely collected in England and Scotland. There was a symbiotic relationship between tartanware production and interest in tartans generated by books on the subject: a tartanware manufacturer from 1820 onward was W. & A. Smith, of Mauchline, also incidentally the publishers of Authenticated Tartans of the Clans and Families of Scotland (1850).; tartanware was sometimes more specifically called Mauchlinware.


Victorian

Leading up to the beginning of Queen Victoria's reign in 1837, tartan was a brisk trade in London, Manchester, and other English cities and towns. In 1839, the Eglinton Tournament, a medieval re-enactment featuring jousting and a ball, was organised in North Ayrshire by Archibald Montgomerie, Earl of Eglinton; it drew some 100,000 spectators, who had been asked to attend in plaids, and included George Murray, Duke of Atholl, arriving with an entire regiment in tartan, his newly re-formed Atholl Highlanders (which still exists as Europe's last remaining private military force).


Vestiarium Scoticum

The first publication showing colour plates of an array of tartans was the Vestiarium Scoticum (meaning 'wardrobe of the Scots'), published in 1842, and it included a first: tartans for Lowland families. It was the work of two brothers: John Carter Allen and Charles Manning Allen, from Surrey, England, who used a variety of assumed names. The two implied they were grandsons of Prince Charles Edward Stuart and Princess Louise of Stolberg-Gedern, and consequently later became known as the "Sobieski Stuarts". They claimed further that the Vestiarium was based on a 1571 manuscript on clan tartans – a manuscript which they never managed to produce. It was not known at the time, but many of the tartans were simply invented by the brothers, and others were taken from early-19th-century sources like the Cockburn and Wilson collections. The brothers heavily favoured basic checks, or crudely divided checks, with thin over-checks added; they had an identifiable style of tartans, assessment of which has varied from "few can be called inspired" to "quite novel and singularly gorgeous". The Vestiarium was followed by their equally dubious The Costume of the Clans in 1845. The books, which "added mystery, romance and some spurious historical documentation to the subject", triggered another wave of interest in tartans, and the enthusiasm generated by these publications led the way for numerous tartan books in the later 19th century.


The sudden availability (and almost unquestioning acceptance) of Lowland tartans helped spread tartan further in popularity. "The  cult was gathering strength and tartan was no longer 'Highland', it had become 'Scottish'."


The Queen and "Balmorality"

Twenty years after her uncle's royal visit to Scotland, Victoria and her husband Prince Albert made their first trip to the Scottish Highlands in 1842; she was the first monarch to set foot in the Highlands since Mary, Queen of Scots, in the 16th century. The visit involved her large royal party being met with several theatrical tartan-kilted welcomes by Highland nobility and their retinues, with much sycophantic newspaper fanfare (while the common people were experiencing considerable misery); the Queen wrote: "It seemed as if a great chieftain in olden feudal times was receiving his sovereign". The monarch's early trips to Scotland were seen as a royal endorsement and had a transformative effect on the image of the country, as a now-loyal land of tartan, pipers, and kilted martial display.


Victoria and Albert leased Balmoral Castle, in Aberdeenshire, in 1848 (and bought it in 1852) as a private royal demesne and hired a local architect to re-model the estate in feudalised Scots baronial style, starting a "sham-castles" trend. Prince Albert personally took care of the interior design, where he made great use of tartan. He used the royal Stewart (red) and the hunting Stewart (green) tartans for carpets, while using the dress Stewart (red and white) for curtains and upholstery. Prince Albert (who often wore the kilt at Balmoral) is said to have created the Balmoral tartan, still used as a royal tartan today. (See illustration at § Family and individual, below.) They even decorated their carriage with tartan. Their adoption of a showy form of Highland dress inspired adoption by subject "who would have previously left Highland dress to the festivals of the Scots."


The royal couple spent a considerable amount of time at their Scottish estate (nearly 7 years in total), and in doing so hosted "Highland" activities. Victoria was attended by pipers, and her children were attired in Highland dress. Prince Albert himself loved watching the Highland games and the pair became patrons of the Braemar Gathering. (Support from and attendance by various nobles may have helped preserve such events to the present, but it also "tartanised" them permanently, all the way into the 21st century.) The royal enthusiasm for and patronage of Highland things generated more early tourism to the Highlands, and a boost to business in the region as far as Perth and Edinburgh. It also spread tartan-wearing to other northern British lords and ladies, who began to invent complicated etiquette rules of dress for Highland garb, which had the effect of increasing the sense that it was upper-class attire. (See § Etiquette, below.) Adoption of tartan continued to spread into England; Thomas Osborne, Duke of Leeds, in West Yorkshire, devised a livery tartan for his men in 1848. Tartan, though a "pseudo-Caledonian masquerade", had become "the stuff of loyalty to the crown", with "a spurious royal and aristocratic cachet". This royal promotion was also noted abroad, with the effect that tartan became one of the widest-recognised cultural-identity symbols for the entire British country.


Despite their considerable devotion to charity (up to 20% of their Privy Purse income), Victoria and Albert, along with their friends in the northern gentry, have been accused of using their "Balmorality" – a term coined by George Scott-Moncrieff (1932) to refer to upper-class appropriation of Highland cultural trappings, marked by "hypocrisy" and "false sentiment" – to trivialise and even fictionalise history. According to Fiona K. Armstrong (2017), they engaged in long-term, tartan-blanketed escapism from the uncertainties of modernising, industrialised society and from pressing British societal problems, while worsening those problems in the actual Highlands. The queen's Balmoral residency also had another detrimental effect on the Scottish Highlands; inspired by her residency, aristocrats who lived outside the Highlands began purchasing estates in the region, resulting in land-ownership disparities that persist into the present day. The Highlands during Victoria's reign also became more accessible by road, rail, and boat.


As the tartan and "romantic Highlands" craze swept over Scotland, the real Highland population suffered grievously from the Hungry Forties as well as the Highland Clearances, when thousands of Gaelic-speaking Scots from the Highlands and Isles were evicted by landlords (often the very men who would have been their clan chiefs) to make way for sheep and for expansive deer-hunting preserves. Scots were also largely disenfranchised from voting, and the Highlands were running out of young men, in great regimental demand to fight and die in foreign wars for the empire, and many emigrating otherwise, with Victoria and Albert directly patronising emigration societies. Nearly 2 million Scots moved to non-European destinations during the Victorian era (more than half the native-born Scottish people of the period), and took a measure of Highlandism with them – "many of the generally understood images of the Highlands were held to be 'real' by people at the time". This would have strong tartan-promoting results among the Scottish diaspora later; Scarlett (1990) calls it a "tartan hunger that has been abroad from late Victorian times to the present day".


Ripple effects

Thomas Babington Macaulay wrote in 1848 of the romantic reinvention of Highland customs as somehow generally Scottish: "Soon the vulgar imagination was so completely occupied by plaids, targets, and claymores, that, by most Englishmen, Scotchman and Highlander were regarded as synonymous words." In 1849, Sir John Graham Dalyell asserted that "forty years ago no reputable gentleman would have appeared in a kilt in the streets of Edinburgh." Scott-Moncrieff (1932) likewise wrote of tartans being "misconceived" and worn all over Scotland (and even England) in the Victorian era as a part of the Queen's influence. Increasingly-urban Scotland was putting on a "rural face" (a trend that would continue with "kailyard" literature). Tartanry and Highlandism were popular in part as a counter to a sense (especially among the aristocracy) that Scotland was losing its separate national identity in the Georgian to Victorian era, being ever more Anglicised as just "North Britain" amid empire-wide modernisation.


In an 1849 letter to a publisher about a planned second edition of Vestiarium Scoticum, John Sobieski Stuart noted that tartan had become "extensively worn and manufactured" on the continent, as far away as France, Germany, Bohemia, and Hungary; he also expressed an interest in working directly with tartanware and tartan book makers W. & A. Smith of Mauchline. The same year, the Duke and Duchess of Atholl (whose entire estate was prescribed tartan livery) hosted a Highland-dress affair in London, the Royal Caledonian Ball, the first known charity ball (still a sold-out annual event today). The 1859 opening of the massive Loch Katrine waterworks (to pump fresh water to Glasgow, running out of well water) was attended by Queen Victoria, with the Atholl Highlanders (cannon in tow), the Celtic Society of Glasgow, and an honour-guard unit called the Glasgow Volunteers putting on a tartan- and piper-laden display for the newspapers; it was a confluence of modern engineering and romantic–patriotic tartanry. When the Prince Consort died in 1861, Victoria commissioned a tartan-kilted statue of Albert at Balmoral by William Theed.


According to Jonathan Faiers (2008), Victoria had actually intentionally made tartan more popular for the benefit of the British textile industry. By the 1860s, tartan was not only as popular in London as in Scotland, leading weaver Wilsons of Bannockburn produced £80,000 of product per year, and employed 500–600 people. (It amalgamated with another of the family businesses, a carpet-weaving operation, in 1867, which continued to 1924.) Around 1860, new synthetic aniline dyes allowed for production of tartans in vivid colours at more affordable prices, and their lower cost translated into more consumption of tartan by the middle class.


As modernisation marched on, the world's first permanent colour photograph, taken by Thomas Sutton (using the three-colour process developed by Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell) in 1861, was of a tartan ribbon. It was created by using red, blue, and yellow filters to create three photographs which were then combined into a composite. R. Martin (1988) notes that there was a confluence of unrelated technological "junctions and serendipities" in the mid-19th century that together broadly promoted tartan, including photography, consistently bright and more economical artificial dyes, affordable colour book printing, mass-production of soft but durable fine textiles, and applicability of printed patterns to middle-class products like tartanware – all "far-removed from the true peasant history of tartan." Ian Brown (2012), a professor with a focus on Scottish literature and culture, has written that while George IV and Victoria (not to mention business interests in their wake, like the Wilsons of Bannockburn and the Smiths of Mauchline) seemed to have been "the winner taking over the loser's tokens", the renewed public interest in tartan within and beyond Scotland was not entirely owing to them, especially given the international interest in Highland-romantic works of Walter Scott and "Ossian". The acceptance of and even enthusiasm for tartan among the post-proscription upper class can be seen as a necessary attempt at reconciliation within a culturally diverse country, and the influence ran both ways, with old Scottish nationalism transmuting into a new unionism that demanded recognition of Scottish interests and institutions. "In short, it is an open question whether George IV in a kilt and Victoria and Albert at Balmoral are appropriating and subverting a set of values, or whether they are being appropriated and subverted." Even the 1822 "King's Jaunt" had been stage-managed by two Scots with a keen interest in romanticising and promoting Gaelic and broader Scottish culture (historico-traditional accuracy notwithstanding), and the Atholls' deep and tartan-arrayed involvement in Victoria's activities in the north can be viewed in the same light. Both George IV and Victoria, primarily of German House of Hanover stock, came to identify strongly with their quite thin Scottish House of Stuart genealogy.


The 1864 funeral of the Sixth Duke of Atholl was another anachronistically feudal, tartan-and-pipers pageant. In 1866–1870, Victoria and the Duchess of Atholl commissioned artist Kenneth MacLeay in Edinburgh to produce a series of watercolours of statuesque men in tartan Highland gear, representing common people from ghillies to shepherds and fishermen, "as they now are". Prints were published in 1870 as Highlanders of Scotland: Portraits Illustrative of the Principal Clans and Followings, and the Retainers of the Royal Household at Balmoral, with text by Amelia (Emily) Murray MacGregor, an attendant of Victoria as well as a Clan Gregor historian and the first female Gaelic lecturer. A tartanistical fantasy, as well as another exercise in "Highlander as noble savage", the art book necessitated canvassing Scottish aristocrats for outfits and suitable models ("specimens"), as the everyday people did not look the hyper-masculine part, were not able to afford such Highland-dress extravagances as were to be illustrated, and were more likely to be wearing trousers than kilts. The resulting book is the most detailed record of the "proper", codified Victorian-era Highland dress and accessories, which "removed tartan from its blustery nonchalance to an ordered set of adornments" – most of which survive to the present, Highland dress being remarkably resistant to further major stylistic changes, Victorian styles having become "traditional". Tartan had also become more established throughout the 1850s and 1860s as a textile for European-fashionable rather than Highland women's clothing, from bodices and dresses to sashes and shawls (the never-extinguished ladies' plaids). The tartan sash in particular was a favourite of the Queen, and remains a common womenswear option, worn several different ways in modern Highland dress, though it has little to do with original Highland clothing before the 19th century; it is an adaptation of the plaid to a style of the European nobility.


In 1871, at the Waverley Ball, a fancy dress affair in London, the Prince of Wales (the future King Edward VII) and his brother Prince Arthur, long accustomed to Highland dress, arrived tartaned out as an old-time Lord of the Isles and as Bonnie Prince Charlie, respectively. In 1872, ethnologist Jacob Falke wrote that "In Scotland indeed the plaid has still some importance, but it is an object of manufacture, and ... its motives have long ago become the common property of fashion, and indeed have become so permeated by it that what is genuine and old in it is scarcely to be recognised". Since its 1880 re-opening, the Gaelic Society of Perth in the Lowlands held festivities that involved much piping and tartan-wear, into the early 20th century, despite the language-preservation organisation having nothing to do with Highland dress or pibroch; being swathed in tartan had somehow become vital to such events. By 1883, Highland dress as proper courtly attire had become highly regulated, aristocratic, and formal, but "inclusive" in one sense – the tartan-wear was permitted at court for essentially anyone claiming Highland origins or land-ownership (even if natively English), not just the gentles of the well-established clans.


In the Victorian era, tartan garments for women as well as men continued to be featured in fashion catalogues, in styles not derived from Highland costume, such as everyday suits and dresses. Tartan had also become popular for children's clothing in continental Europe, inspired by the royal children of Victoria. In the United States, tartan was similarly worked into school uniforms, especially at Catholic schools. The late 19th century saw tartan (sometimes in silk) in fashion throughout Europe, including in France (e.g. Paris, Lyon, and Alsace) and Italy, and as far from Britain as Russia. (See c. 1855 French master weaver's illustration of complex tartan-making.) Founded in 1898, Walker's Shortbread has long been sold in royal Stewart tartan packaging around the world (especially for Christmas and Hogmanay).


20th century to present

In the Edwardian era, tartan had become less a component of men's clothing (with the decline in kilt-wearing) but more an important part of women's fashion, including fanciful haute couture designs from Paris that had no connection to Highland style, and many accessories such as petticoats, stockings, and blouses; masculine accessories included braces (suspenders), neckties, cummerbunds, and socks.


Edward VII himself had grown up wearing Highland dress frequently. There was also in this period into the 1920s a market for Highland-dress etiquette booklets, which tied into the era's "dress sense" of decorum and class (see also § Etiquette, below). Because of its associations with the British aristocracy, Scottish clans, and Highland military, tartan had developed an air of dignity and exclusivity. Because of this, tartan was to make periodic resurgences in the world of fashion. The tartan uniforms of the Scottish Regiments were an important recruiting tool during World War I; as Archibald Primrose, Lord Rosebery, put it: "there is nothing so magnificent in our army as the swing of a kilted regiment". Tartan's Georgian re-orientation as a symbol representing unionism and empire continued well into the first half of the 20th century, though outright tartanry and Highlandism on the part of the upper class waned, especially after about 1920. Nevertheless, Edward VIII, later Duke of Windsor, was a life-long devotee of tartan, often wearing more than one at a time.


Tartan patterns (often simple, unnamed ones) remained commonly used for skirts and pinafore dresses (jumper dresses) in Catholic and other private school uniform codes in North America and also in public and private schools in New Zealand. The style spread to many other places, including South America, Japan (which sometimes imports tartan directly from Scotland), and Hong Kong.


Harry Lauder (properly Sir Henry – he was knighted for his war-effort fundraising during World War I) became world-famous in the 1910s and 1920s, on a dance hall and vaudeville entertainment platform of tartan Highland dress, a thick Scots accent, and folksy songs about an idealised, rural Scotland, like his hit "Roamin' in the Gloamin'". At one point, he was the highest-paid performer in the world, and toured the United States, Australia, South Africa, and of course the UK to sold-out audiences. A Lowlander himself, Lauder has been credited with (and blamed for) keeping alive a tartanry-and-Highlandism image of Scotland, with critics calling him a "kilted clown" who promoted the idea of Scotsmen "clothed like the chieftain of Clan McCrazy".


Diaspora and globalisation

By the mid-20th century, annual Highland games events, modelled on the traditional events in Scotland, had been established not just in Scotland but throughout the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, among other places with a notable Scottish diaspora, which totals about 50 million people worldwide. There are dozens of such events in Scotland, and at least 260 annual Highland games events worldwide as of 2000, more than 100 of them in the US alone, and dozens more in Canada. They are closely intertwined with bagpipe band competitions (which date to 1781), a lasting source of tartan imagery in their regiment-inspired Highland uniforms.


The games' rather flamboyantly tartaned subculture is sustained outside Scotland primarily by multi-generational Scottish descendants rather than by direct Scottish expatriates.


Tartan Day, an annual symbolic ethnicity holiday among the Scottish diaspora, is a growing affair celebrated on 6 April, the date on which the Declaration of Arbroath was signed in 1320. Tartan Day was first declared in Nova Scotia in 1987, and was essentially nation-wide in Canada by the 1990s. It has since spread to Australia (with varying levels of official recognition, 1989–1996), the US (1998), and other places including New Zealand, and even Argentina and Paris, France. In New York City, it has turned into an entire Tartan Week since 1999, with honorary "grand marshals" that are usually Scottish celebrities.


The term tartanism (as distinct from tartanry) has been coined by Ian Brown (2012) for this international tokenisation of tartan as an ethnic-identity symbol, evolving to some degree independently to suit diasporic cultural needs and unrestrained by the views of the originating Scottish "home" culture. According to Ian Maitland Hume (2001), tartan and the kilt are powerful symbols that "encapsulate many facets of a heritage which people aspire to access ... a part-mythical family origin for those seeking roots".


The Scottish Tartans Museum and Heritage Center was opened by the Scottish Tartans Society in 1988 in Highlands, North Carolina; in 1994, it moved to nearby Franklin. The museum, which runs independently of STS, features over 600 tartans on display, including specimens dating to c. 1725, and Highland dress examples to ca. 1800. (STS also operated a Scottish Tartans Museum in Edinburgh, but it closed when STS did in 2000.) A major exhibition on tartan was produced by the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York 1988–89, and another was created for the Edinburgh Festival in 1989. Others followed in Italy in 2003, and Japan in 2018. In April 2023, the Victoria and Albert Museum of Dundee (V&A Dundee) opened a design exhibit (running until January 2024) about tartan and its "shifting context", with goals of "challenging preconceptions of what tartan is, whether that be from a historical sense or fashion sense".


D. Gordon Teall of Teallach, of the Scottish Tartans Society, observed in 1994:


Tartans have always formed part of Scotland's historic heritage and it is a compliment to their country that they have become so widespread throughout the English and Gaelic speaking world. They are probably more popular now than they have ever been because they have come to symbolise the spirit of families, clans and districts and, more recently, corporate institutions.

Even as tartan has been bent to the cultural needs of the diaspora, as "the most straightforward and outward sign of ... affinity with Scottishness", and bent to the commercial intents of fashion, tourism, entertainment, and other industries, tartan's reception by native Scots in Scotland has been less favourable for decades, even the last century or so. Reasons include a feeling that it is not really a symbol of broad Scottish national identity because of its specifically Gaelic and Highland origin; the "Highlandist" and imperialist foisting of it on the entire country as national costume in the late Georgian through Victorian eras; distorted views of Scottish people promulgated by Lauder and other tartaned entertainers of a century ago; an academic view of tartary and Lowland kailyard literature as two halves of a low-brow, romanticising vulgarity (reinforced in recent decades by the "Tartan Army" fandom of the Scotland national football team reinvigorating a working-class attachment to kilts and tartan); and historically inaccurate portrayal of Scotland by tartan-heavy Hollywood productions like Brigadoon (1954) and Braveheart (1995). Brancaz (2016) argues that "looking at tartan through the lens of the intelligentsia fails to account for its enduring appeal and resilience. ... he wearing of kilts and tartans at weddings, funerals, and cèilidhs in Scotland has increasingly been interpreted as a form of cultural reappropriation."


Industry and politics

In 2006, the British Ministry of Defence sparked controversy when it allowed foreign woollen mills to bid for the government contracts to provide the tartans used by the Scottish troops (newly amalgamated as battalions into the Royal Regiment of Scotland), and lowered the formerly very high standards for the cloth.


Following a bill submitted in the Scottish Parliament in February 2007, Scotland's enterprise minister announced in July 2007 that the National Archives of Scotland would set up a national register of tartans. The announcement stated that "Tartan's importance to Scotland cannot be overestimated. It is deeply embedded in Scottish culture and is an internationally recognised symbol of Scotland." This was later reiterated in 2013 through the BBC. The ministry cited an industry report indicating that "the tartan industry is a significant contributor to the overall Scottish economy; and larger ... than suggested by previous industry estimates", and is the basis for some 200 businesses, 4,000 jobs, and £350 million in annual GDP in Scotland. The bill passed in October 2008, and the Scottish Register of Tartans launched in February 2009. (See § Registration, below.)


The Observer reported in 2010 that tartan clothing had become more popular than ever before, crossing subcultural, social-class, and age-group lines, and showing in that year a 540% sales increase in Britain from only two years earlier. Around the same time, there began a resurgence in tartan kilt wearing among Scottish young people "as a mark of a vibrant, modern Scotland". This has interrupted a generations-long trend of native Scottish disaffection toward tartan as stereotyping kitsch. An online survey by BBC in 2012 found that 52% of respondents strongly or very strongly disagreed with the premise "Walter Scott's re-branding of all Scots as tartan-wearing Highlanders has been a hindrance to Scotland's cultural development", and only a third agreed. Tartan in mainstream, international fashion experienced another resurgence starting in 2019.


Contemporary Scottish nationalism has been said to be "fed, in part, by tartan and Jacobite nostalgia". After avoidance of tartan since the 1970s (especially by Scottish liberals), the cloth has been politicised again as a nationalist symbol (as it was in the early 18th century), especially during the 2014 Scottish independence referendum and in the Scottish National Party's 2015 campaign. (Perhaps owing to this messaging shift, the VisitScotland agency around the same time changed its tourism advertising to minimise, though not eliminate, tartan imagery.) Murray Pittock (2002) writes that the neo-Jacobitism is "both irritating kitsch and a language of identity" for modern Scots. After several decades of intellectual hostility toward tartan (e.g. in Tom Nairn's 1977 The Break-up of Britain: Crisis and Neo-nationalism, and Hugh Trevor-Roper's posthumous 2008 The Invention of Scotland), an "academic re-assessment of tartan" began in the early 21st century, relying on a wider range of early and modern source material, in historiographical, multidisciplinary edited volumes including Scottish History: The Power of the Past (eds. Edward J. Cowan and Richard J. Finlay, 2002) and From Tartan to Tartany (ed. Ian Brown, 2010).


Major commercial weavers (tartan mills) of traditional tartan cloth that are operating today include Lochcarron of Scotland in Lochcarron and Selkirk; Ingles Buchan in Glasgow; House of Edgar (also a Highland dress vendor, and a subsidiary of Macnaughton Holdings) in Perth; Johnstons of Elgin (also a wool clothing maker), Strathmore Woollen in Forfar, and D. C. Dalgliesh in Selkirk, all three of which are now part of the Edinburgh-based Scotweb, under the trade name Clan; Prickly Thistle (also a women's clothing maker) in Evanton and Edinburgh; The Tartan Weaving Mill (also a weaving museum, and a subsidiary of Gold Brothers) in Edinburgh; Andrew Elliot Ltd in Selkirk; Stevens & Graham (specialising mostly in tartan rugs and carpet) in Rutherglen; Marton Mills in West Yorkshire, England; Cambrian Woollen Mill, in Powys, Wales; West Coast Woollen Mills in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; GK Textiles in Port Moody, BC (formerly Fraser & Kirkbright, Vancouver); and Pendleton Woolen Mills in Portland, Oregon, US. The modern trade in wool tartan fabric has three principal markets: Highland dress, high fashion (with significant business from France and Italy), and furnishing.


Popular tartans (including for kilts and other Highland dress, as well as for school uniforms) have increasingly been manufactured, primarily in the UK, in poly-viscose (PV), a blend of the artificial materials polyester and viscose (rayon), typically in a 65% polyester to 35% viscose ratio. PV is promoted as washable, durable, crease-resistant but heat-settable for permanent pleating, shrinkage-resistant, stain-resistant, colour-fast, low-pilling, hypoallergenic, not attractive to clothes moths, more "breatheable" than polyester (thus good for athletics), lower cost than wool, and lighter weight than wool, but said to have a wool-like texture. It also does not rely on animal industry, so it appeals to vegans. Large-scale global manufacturers of tartan-patterned cloth in a variety of cotton, polyester, viscose, nylon, etc., materials and blends include Başkan Tekstil in Istanbul and Bursa, Turkey; and Jeen Wei Enterprises in Taichung, Taiwan; while a leading maker of tartan ribbon is Satab in Saint-Just-Malmont, France. Tartan designs have long been produced in low-cost cotton in large quantities in China.


Carol Craig (2003) writes: "Like it or not, tartan is a very sophisticated branding and marketing tool for Scotland." In a tartan-as-marketing analysis, Paterson (2001) observed that continued internationalisation of tartan manufacture, design, and consumption has diluted the associative "Scottishness" of tartan and its value as a national identifier. He blames this in part on Scottish weavers' failure to adapt to market demands for a wider range of fabric applications, as well as the businesses' own complicity in broadening tartan's perceived cultural identity, e.g. in creating tartans for non-Scottish families, places, and organisations.


(For particular 20th-century to present-day tartans, see also § Corporate and commercial and § Fashion, below.)


In popular culture

In 1947, the tartan-laden Broadway musical Brigadoon (followed by a film version in 1954 and a television adaptation in 1966) renewed an excessively romanticised notion of the Highlands and Highland dress. A critical review called it a "whimsical dream-world" that was "overloaded with Hollywood-Scottish trappings". (The production is generally not well received by actual Scots.)


Tartan suits were popular in the mod subculture of Great Britain of the early to mid-1960s and its late 1970s revival.


Since the 1970s, the fandom of the Scotland men's national football (soccer) team have been collectively referred to by the nickname "Tartan Army", with fans often sporting tartan clothing (including kilts) at matches.


Popular in the mid-1970s, Scottish teeny-bopper band the Bay City Rollers were described by the British Hit Singles & Albums reference book as "tartan teen sensations from Edinburgh".


Tartan became a common element of punk subculture starting in the late 1970s. Punk music was a way for youth in the British Isles to voice their discontent with the ruling class and with modern society. The unorthodox use of tartan (especially the royal Stewart), which had long been associated with authority and gentility, was then seen as an expression of that discontent. In this way, tartan – worn unconventionally – became an anti-establishment symbol. This was entirely on purpose according to Vivienne Westwood, a designer deeply involved in early punk fashion; the idea was "to seize the very fabric of the Establishment in order to reverse its meaning and perhaps to challenge society's design." American punks often wore tartan skirts, a "subversion" of the Catholic school-girl uniform, and kilts have also been worn in the punk scene since the late 1970s, especially in the UK. Baggy tartan pants later proved popular among pop-punks and skate punks, and tartan-lined jackets among ska punks. (For further information, see Punk fashion.) From the late 1990s, kilts (mostly modernised "utility kilts" but sometimes traditional ones) have become relatively popular even in North American post-punk subculture (e.g. the goth–industrial, emo, and steampunk scenes), though often in black rather than tartan.


After the 1970s, Westwood, who continued to work extenstively with tartan, was joined by other big-name couturiers. These included Ralph Lauren and Laura Ashley, whose designs promoted tartan as a mainstream modern clothing option "with traditional grace and style" for both women and men; Stephen Sprouse, credited with a 1980s combination of "uptown sophistication in clothing with a downtown punk and pop sensibility"; and later Alexander McQueen, who was "consciously repoliticising the cloth". Others have included Jean Paul Gaultier, Tommy Hilfiger (who made tartan central to his fall 2000 collection), Christian Lacroix, Yves Saint Laurent, Giorgio Armani, and Gianfranco Ferré. A tartan outfit designed by Westwood featured on a commemorative UK postage stamp issued by the Royal Mail in 2012 celebrating "Great British Fashion".


Tartan/plaid flannel shirts, emblematic of the working class, re-entered mainstream fashion through a series of subcultural adoptions, originating primarily in the western United States. First, the style became a staple of cholo style in and around Los Angeles, from the 1970s. From there, the style later became adopted by hip hop fashion in the 1990s, especially the West Coast hip hop lifestyle. Tartan flannel shirts also became quintessentially part of (and androgynous within) the grunge scene (starting in Seattle) of the late 1980s to 2000s. There was fashion cross-pollination between these youth-culture movements, and the fashion industry has found this confluence very marketable.


A resurgence of interest in tartan and kilts (and even Scottish tourism) has been generated in recent times by major Hollywood productions like the Highlander franchise (1986–2007), Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994), Braveheart (1995), Rob Roy (1995), Brave (2012), and the television series Outlander (2014–, with a follow-on travelogue documentary series, Men in Kilts). Many of these featured custom-designed tartans.


Tartan clothing has appeared frequently in Doctor Who. The Fourth Doctor (Tom Baker) wore a Wallace tartan scarf on Terror of the Zygons, and his robot-dog companion K9 had a tartan collar. The Sixth Doctor (Colin Baker) had a signature patchwork frock coat that included segments in three different tartans, and also typically wore a tartan waistcoat in a fourth sett under it. The Seventh Doctor (Sylvester McCoy) wore a crimson and black tartan scarf on Time and the Rani. Clara Oswald (Jenna Coleman), the companion of the Eleventh Doctor (Matt Smith) and the Twelfth Doctor (Peter Capaldi), wore a Campbell tartan dress on "The Name of the Doctor" and a Wallace skirt on "The Time of the Doctor" and "Deep Breath". Annabel Scholey as Claire Brown, in the Thirteenth Doctor (Jodie Whittaker) serial Flux, wears a 1960s-style muted tartan dress. The Fourteenth Doctor (David Tennant) wore a brown tartan suit in the 60th anniversary specials.


Popular designs

One of the most popular tartans is the royal Stewart, ostensibly the personal tartan of the British monarch, since George IV declared it his own (though it was probably designed by the Sobieski Stuarts, albeit based on mid-18th-century pattern called "Prince Charles Edward Stuart"). The "royal" sett was first published in 1831 in the book The Scottish Gaël by James Logan. In addition to its use in clothing, such as skirts and scarves, royal Stewart tartan has also appeared on biscuit tins for Scottish shortbread, and it has also long been favoured by the British punk scene.


Another tartan in very common use by the general public is Black Watch (also known as old Campbell, Grant hunting, and Government). This tartan, a dark variant (and ancestor) of the main Clan Campbell tartan, has long been used by military units in the British Army and other Commonwealth forces.


Early manufacturer Wilsons of Bannockburn made many "fashion", "fancy", or "national" tartans with catalogue numbers or fanciful names, without any association with particular families, districts, or organisations; two popular ones still in use are both usually called "Caledonia". Wilsons No. 3 is found in their 1819 Key Pattern Book and is comparatively simple, while No. 144 is more complex, though of a similar colour scheme, and seems to date to the late 18th century. (The numbering suggests the other does as well.) Some other tartans in this "Caledonia" group were later claimed by clans; e.g. Caledonia No. 43 or "Kidd" became one of the MacPherson tartans.


In the general fashion industry, various patterns are technically tartan but are not treated as tartans in the clan or district sense. The very basic red-and-black Rob Roy or Robert Roy MacGregor pattern, the oldest of the Clan Gregor setts (though named after Rob Roy in the Victorian period), is also in broad use (often with changed colours) as one of the most common patterns used in flannel cloth for clothing and bedding; in the US, it is often called "buffalo plaid", a term of uncertain derivation. When the Rob Roy sett is changed to a white ground with any other colour this forms the most common gingham cloth style. Gingham is often given a wider setting, to form a lattice appearance (sometimes called "windowpane plaid" or "windowpane check"). When that pattern is given one or more additional over-check colours, the result is the pattern known as tattersall.


Tartans for specific purposes

In addition to clan tartans, many tartan patterns have been developed for individuals, families, districts and towns, institutions, corporations, and events. They have even been created for particular religious and ethnic groups, and for sociological groups like the LGBT community. Tartan has had a long history with the military, and today some military units – particularly those within the Commonwealth – have tartan dress uniforms. (See List of tartans § UK military or government tartans.)


Regional

Many districts, cities, and towns in Scotland have their own tartans, mostly dating to the 20th century (though some few district tartans are quite old), and not always official; many were just created for marketing to tourists, and some are copyrighted works tied to specific vendors. They are intended primarily for those to whom a clan tartan does not seem to apply (see § Etiquette, below). At least two local government councils in Scotland have official tartans.


In addition to the traditional district and modern geographic tartans of Scotland, new designs have been created for places in other countries. Only some regional tartans are officially recognised by the government bodies of the places the designs represent.


The pan-Celticism movement has inspired the creation of "national" (in the sense of Celtic nations) and sometimes regional tartans "to emphasise the ... bonds with other Celtic countries" outside of Scotland; none of these appear to have any official recognition. There are tartans of Cornwall, long a part of Devonshire in England (the designs date from 1963 to the 1980s); Wales (from 1967 onward – sometimes with false claims of antiquity by marketers); the Isle of Man (from 1946, many by D. G. Teall of the Scottish Tartans Society, and several asymmetric); Brittany in France (from 2002); Galicia in Spain (from 1990); and especially Ireland (from 1956).


After the discovery of the "Dungiven tartan" (see § 16th century, above) and its marketing as a district tartan for Ulster, Scottish weavers (and in two cases English, and in another American) decided to tap an Irish and especially Irish-American market by introducing a profusion of national, province, and county tartans for Ireland and Northern Ireland, generally based on established Scottish tartans with some colour changes. These geographical tartans, which (aside from the Dungiven/Ulster reconstruction of 1956) date to 1970 and later, do not have any official recognition, and are purely a product of the industry. One weaver even introduced a competing set of Irish national and county tartans in 1996, different from the previous offerings. "The influence of native Irish people, either as suppliers or consumers of Irish tartans, would appear to be minimal."


Further afield, all but two Canadian provinces and territories have official tartans, with the first dating from 1956. Neither Quebec nor Nunavut, Canada's newest territory, have formally adopted patterns. Alberta, meanwhile, has two official tartans, including a dress one. All but Quebec's were registered with the Court of the Lord Lyon in Scotland. Canada has an official national tartan that was originally designed to commemorate the introduction of its new maple leaf flag, and was made an official national emblem in 2011. Various Canadian regions (like Labrador and Cape Breton Island), counties, municipalities, and institutions also have official tartans.


Tartans have been created for Australia; its capital city, Canberra; each of its states; and some of its local government areas; but only some of those tartans have been officially adopted or recognised by the relevant governments in Australia. US states have official tartans, with the first dating from 1988.


Hunting, mourning, dress, and dance

A tartan is sometimes differentiated from another with the same name by a label: hunting, mourning, dress, or dance. The first three of these ideas are the result of Victorian fondness for dress etiquette and show (and weaver marketing); the last is more recent.


Hunting tartans tend to be made up of subdued colours, such as dark blues, greens, and browns. Although there is some evidence of early tartans with camouflage colours going back to the 16th century, hunting tartans, despite the name, have very little to do with actual hunting.


Mourning tartans, though quite rare, are associated with death and funerals. They are usually designed using combinations of black and white, or by replacing bright colours such as reds and yellows in a traditional tartan with black, white, or grey.


Dress tartans are usually special tartans for formal-dress occasions (e.g. dress Stewart is distinct from both the main royal Stewart tartan and the hunting Stewart, among several other tartans attributed to Stewart/Stuart). In a few cases, a dress tartan is simply the main tartan of the clan. Dress tartans that do differ from main clan tartans are sometimes entirely different (e.g. MacMillan and MacMillan dress are unrelated designs), while in most cases they are based on the main tartan but with colour differences (e.g. Stewart). Some dress tartans are very modern, but some date back to the era of the Vestiarium Scoticum.


Dance tartans, intended for Highland dance outfits, for either sex, are inspired (like most dress tartans before them) by the arisaid (earasaid tartans thought to have been worn by Highland women in the 17th and 18th centuries, which often featured white as a major colour, as do typical dance tartans today (most or all of which date to the 20th century or later). Some dance tartans are named "arisaid" rather than "dance", e.g. Fraser arisaid.


There has been some confusion between dress and dance tartans, especially since the idea of the latter developed from the former. Most dress tartans, including some of the oldest, also have white in them, and have been used for dance competition in lieu of a dance-specific tartan, so are easy to mistake for dance tartans, which almost invariably have white in them.


Family and individual

A large proportion of non-clan tartans in all of the modern tartan databases have always been family tartans, promulgated mostly from the late 20th century for family names that are not clans or listed as septs of clans. These are usually Scottish surnames, but the Scottish Register of Tartans (SRT) database increasingly includes new family tartans for names that are not Scottish or even British. Most family tartans have no copyright claim, since they are intended for use by anyone with the surname or an extended-family connection. The SRT classifies them together with clan tartans in a "clan/family" category if they have history that pre-dates SRT or if they are newer and are approved by a legally recognized clan chief or family head, but in a "name" category if they are newer and lack such imprimatur.


A few non-clan family tartans have an older pedigree. The best known is Balmoral tartan, reserved for the British royal family and personal pipers thereof, since its creation by Prince Albert c. 1852. (See also further discussion under § Etiquette, below.) Some clans recognise tartans for specific family branches and septs that are not themselves generally regarded as clans. For example, Clan Robertson/Donnachaidh/Duncan acknowledges separate, established tartans (some of them quite old) for Inches, MacGlashan, MacInroy, MacLagan, MacPhee, MacWilliam, Reid, and Robinson, and they are all registered in the SRT.


Since the late 1960s, various weavers have marketed (primarily to Irish Americans) some tartans with Irish family names, without any involvement by family members. There had also been a legend that the rare Clans Originaux (1880) contained Irish family tartans, but this was finally disproven in 2003. There is one case of a formal Irish clan/family tartan, however: The Clan Cian Society commissioned a tartan for Cian of Ely, and registered it with the Chief Herald of Ireland in 1983. (Even this has an Irish-American connection, as the chief resided in California, and the society is US-headquartered.) Similarly, a commercial operation in Cardiff named Wales Tartan Centre (supplied by Cambrian Woollen Mill) has since the early 2000s promoted a long series of tartans named for common or prominent Welsh family names; they are unusual in often having odd-numbered thread counts, and having a different warp and weft (producing rectangular rather than square patterns), probably to distinguish them from the Scottish style.


For the much narrower sense of family, the SRT registers also as "name" tartans those that are created by individuals for only themselves and their immediate-family members, often for weddings; these usually have a copyright claim. One of the earliest tartans named for a specific person is the "Janet Wilson sett", entered into the late 1770s records of Wilsons of Bannockburn and believed to refer to the company founder's wife or daughter-in-law, though made as one of their publicly available patterns.


Corporate and commercial

Numerous Scottish brands use tartan, and some have unique tartans. Various not-for-profit organisations also have corporate tartans. Probably the earliest case was that of the Ancient Caledonian Society of London (founded in 1786 and defunct since 1837), which used what is believed to have been a consistent tartan for its members' frock coats (which, unusually, featured brocade woven into the tartan, of Jacobite white roses – it may be what 1767 advertisements called "flowered tartan"); only one known example of the coat survives.


As an example of a modern commercial tartan, Irn-Bru (introduced in 1901), the best-selling soft drink in Scotland, has its own tartan. Scottish regional airline Loganair uses tartan livery, including on the tails of its planes, and has two registered corporate tartans. "Racing Stewart" is a pattern created in 1995 for the Jackie Stewart Formula One car-racing team.


The "corporate" category is one of the fastest-growing in the official Scottish Register of Tartans (SRT) database, with a large number of Scottish (and American and other) companies and societies registering organisational tartans. These are generally protected by copyright and sometimes trademark law. These tartans vary in purpose from general corporate livery, to special event tartans, to tartans for fictional characters.


Two examples of the latter are Sanrio's 2004 creation of a predominantly pink tartan for Hello Kitty; and the 2011 creation by Disney/Pixar of the DunBroch tartan for the family of the main character, Mérida, of the animated Highland fantasy/adventure film Brave.


Fashion

An early example of a tartan created by and for the fashion industry, and surely the most famous, is "Burberry check". It was introduced in the 1920s for the lining of trench coats made by Burberry of London, but has been used for all manner of clothing and accessories since 1967 (with another major marketing push in 2001) and is emblematic of the company and its upscale product line. (For additional information, including a legal dispute, see § Legal protection, below.)


A fast-growing category in the SRT is that of "fashion" tartans, created by companies and individual designers simply for aesthetic reasons, without any association with a particular clan, family, region, etc. Like organisational tartans, most of these have a copyright claim attached to them.


A prominent example: In 2017, Scottish fashion designer Charles Jeffrey designed a signature tartan for his Loverboy label, registering it in the SRT.


Regulation

Manufacture and use of tartan (at least in the Scottish context) is regulated, formally and informally, in three ways: registration (recording of a tartan and its association, if any, with a particular family, organisation, person, event, etc.); legal protection of a tartan as intellectual property (trademark, copyright); and etiquette (socio-cultural norms regarding the use of tartan and Highland dress).


Registration

The naming and registration of "official" clan tartans began in 1815, when the Highland Society of London solicited clan tartans from clan chiefs.


Following recognition by a clan chief of a tartan as a clan tartan, the chief was formerly able to petition the Lord Lyon King of Arms, the Scottish heraldic authority, to register it as a formal clan tartan. Once approved by the Lord Lyon, after recommendation by the Advisory Committee on Tartan, the clan tartan was then recorded in the Lyon Court Books. However, leading up to the launch of the Scottish Register of Tartans in 2009 (see below for details), the office of the Lord Lyon stopped providing this tartan-recording process (though its statutory authority was not changed by the Tartans Bill).


Modern-day tartans can be created and registered by anyone, with the Scottish Register of Tartans. Modern registered tartans include ones for Scottish and other districts, cities, and towns; for Irish counties (devised since the 1990s) and families (for example, the surname Fitzpatrick has two registered tartans); for organisations and companies; and even for specific events or individuals. Tartans are also being created in record numbers among the Scottish diaspora in the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, etc., especially for places, military divisions, pipe bands, and individuals and their immediate families.


Until the late 20th century, instead of a central official tartan registry, independent organisations located in Scotland, Canada, and the United States documented and recorded tartans. In 1963, an organisation called the Scottish Tartans Society (now defunct, and originally named Scottish Tartans Information Centre) was created to record and preserve every known tartan design. The society's Register of All Publicly Known Tartans (RAPKT) contained about 2,700 different designs of tartan. Registration of new designs was not free of charge. The society, however, ran into financial troubles in 2000, and folded.


Former members of that society formed two new Scotland-based entities – the Scottish Tartans Authority (STA, 1996 – before STS closed) and the Scottish Tartans World Register (STWR, 2000 – the trade name of a private company, Tartan Registration Ltd). Both of these organisations initially based their databases on the RAPKT. STA's database, the International Tartan Index (ITI) consisted of about 3,500 different tartans (with over 7,000, counting variants) as of 2004. The online ITI was later rebranded The Tartan Ferret. STWR's self-titled Scottish Tartans World Register database was made up of about 3,000 different designs as of 2004. Both organisations were registered as Scottish charities and recorded new tartans (free in the case of STA and for a fee in the case of STWR) on request.


In the interim, a jointly Scotland- and US-based organisation, International Association of Tartan Studies and Tartan Educational & Cultural Association (IATS/TECA) emerged in 1984 and published its own TartanArt database in the early 1990s as Microsoft Windows software which was much used in the North American kilt-making trade. IATS/TECA was absorbed by STA by 2005.


The Scottish Register of Tartans (SRT) is Scotland's official tartan register, and was established in 2009. SRT is maintained and administered by the National Archives of Scotland (NAS), a statutory body based in Edinburgh. The aim of the register is to provide a definitive and accessible resource to promote and preserve tartans. It is also intended to be the definitive source for the registration of new tartans (if they pass criteria for inclusion and a registration fee is paid). The database itself – also named simply Scottish Register of Tartans, and sometimes called TartanRegister from its domain name – is made up of the pre-existing registers of STA and STWR as they were at the time of SRT's launch (preserving the STA's and STWR's registration numbers, dates, and other details in the SRT data), plus new registrations from 5 February 2009 onward. On the register's website, users can register new tartans, search for existing tartans and request their thread counts, and receive notifications of newly registered tartans.


STWR became defunct some time after 2008. STA later closed the ITI/Tartan Ferret to new registrations, and in late 2022 removed the search feature from the STA website (pending a site redesign), deferring to the Scottish Register of Tartans, which now appears to be the only operating tartan registry. STA continues offline work on the ITI database, correcting errors, importing new SRT additions, and recording historical patterns newly discovered in museum holdings, etc.


Legal protection

Some modern tartans are protected by trademark law, and the trademark proprietor can, in certain circumstances, prevent others from selling that tartan. An example is the "Burberry check" of the English fashion house, an instantly recognisable tartan that is very well known around the world.


Unlike trademark registration and copyright registration, the Scottish Register of Tartans (SRT) and its authorising Tartans Bill do not create any new or enhanced intellectual property rights through the act of registration (nor provide any enforcement mechanism other than removal of infringing entries from the registry).


SRT, however, permits registrants optionally to assert and record copyright and/or trademark claims over their new tartans, for designs that are eligible for such protection under other established law (such as the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988; and the Scotland Act 1998, which took over copyright and trademark registration and enforcement in Scotland) and lists such tartans as restricted. An SRT registration "provides evidence of the existence and date of  design", which helps establish the copyright date under the Berne Copyright Convention. Such legal protections apply only to comparatively recently created tartans; old clan, regimental, and district tartans are outside the protection periods of such intellectual property laws.


SRT also permits the listing of intended use and manufacture restriction preferences, but has no enforcement capability, and also includes a statement that "No other rights can be conferred." British tartan weavers, such as Lochcarron and D. C. Dalgliesh, generally will not produce material in an SRT "restricted" tartan without written evidence of permission from the copyright/trademark claimant. In additional furtherance of intellectual property concerns, the SRT also refuses to register a new tartan that is confusingly similar to any existing one (as determined by an SRT review process).


The application of copyright law to tartans is not well tested. The leading British legal case on textile copyright, concerned with designs printed on fabric, is Designer Guild Ltd v Russell Williams (Textiles) Ltd (2000), finding for fairly broad copyright protection in textile works that involve creative originality. In 2008, two tartan pattern copyright holders, Rosemary Nicolson Samios and weaver Lochcarron of Scotland, took legal action for infringement of an Isle of Skye district sett (designed 1993) and the Princess Diana Memorial sett (designed 1997), respectively, against the Gold Brothers firm of Surinder, Galab, Malap, and Dildar Singh, who operate dozens of stores in Scotland and online that sell primarily Chinese-made tartan objects or "tartan-tat", including cheap Highland-dress outfits, for the tourist market. The Isle of Skye tartan was considerably profitable for Samios, after the pattern was popularised by Queen Elizabeth II wearing it in 1999. The Princess Diana sett was designed by Alistair Buchan of Lochcanrron and of the Scottish Tartans Authority as a charity fundraiser. A British court on 2 July 2008 issued an interim interdict (preliminary injunction) against Gold Brothers' sale of Isle of Skye goods, after a police search found hundreds of metres of the pattern in Chinese-made cloth in the company's warehouse. Both cases may have been settled out-of-court because published news regarding them ceases in 2008. A more recent case, Abraham Moon & Sons Ltd v. Thornber & Others (2012), actually involved tartan. It held that the textual ticket stamp (a detailed set of weaving instructions, i.e. a thread count with additional information on precise colours, etc.) used to produce a tartan designed in-house by the claimant had been infringed, was protected as a literary work, and also constituted a "recording" of the graphical work of the tartan and thus was independently protected as a work of artistic craftsmanship. As of 2020, the decision was being appealed, as it conflicted with previous caselaw, e.g. Hensher v Restawile (1976), holding such instructions to be uncopyrightable.


While tartan arguably could be classified as a form of intangible cultural heritage, and its value to identifying Scottish products both in Scotland and internationally has been recognised and exploited for a long time, tartan is not protected by either geographical indication (protected designation of origin) law, nor sui generis legislation specific to that kind of product. Harris tweed, another textile associated more narrowly with Scotland, does have such protection. In 1998, Keith Lumsden, research officer of the Scottish Tartans Society, proposed that the word tartan be prohibited for use to market a textile, unless the design was accepted in an official governmental tartan registry (which did not then exist). When the Scottish Parliament finally authorised the Scottish Register of Tartans in 2008, it did not include anything like this sort of trade protection. According to Michael B. Paterson (2001): "No mechanism exists to protect  tartan from 'misuse' by interests having nothing to do with Scotland or Scotland's interests", though the tartan registries "play an important, if weak, role in asserting Scotland's cultural rights in relation to tartan."


Etiquette

Since the Victorian era, authorities on tartan have claimed that there is an etiquette to wearing tartan, specifically tartan attributed to clans or families. In the same line of opinion, some tartans attributed to the British royal family have been claimed to be "off limits" to non-royalty. Even so, there are no laws or universally accepted rules on who can or cannot wear a particular tartan. (Some writers have nevertheless asserted their existence anyway, e.g. Alexander Campbell in 1890, regarding different Campbell tartans.) The concept of the entitlement to certain tartans has led to the term universal tartan, or free tartan, which describes tartan which can be worn by anyone without controversy. Traditional examples of such are the Black Watch, Caledonia, hunting Stewart, and Jacobite tartans, shepherds' check, and district tartans. The published marketing of tartans for simple fashion purposes without any association to a place or body dates back to at least 1745, and much of Wilsons' output through the 19th century consisted of "fancy" patterns for the general public. Some recently created designs intended for everyone (though some are exclusive to particular weavers or Highland-dress outfitters) have names including Braveheart, Clansman, European Union, Highlander, Independence, Pride of Scotland, Rainbow, Scotland 2000, Scotland the Brave, Scottish National, Scottish Parliament, Spirit of Scotland, Stone of Destiny, and Twenty First Century.


Books on Scottish clans list guidelines, but are not always in agreement. One such opinion is that people not bearing a clan surname, or surname claimed as a sept of a clan, should not wear the tartan of their mother's clan. This opinion is reinforced by the fact that in the Scottish clan system, the Lord Lyon states that membership to a clan technically passes through the surname. This means that children who bear their father's surname belong to the father's clan (if any), and that children who bear their mother's surname (her maiden name) belong to their mother's clan (if any). Also, the Lord Lyon states that a clan tartan should only be worn by those who profess allegiance to that clan's chief.


Some clan societies even claim that certain tartans are the personal property of a chief or chieftain, and in some cases they allow or deny their clansfolk "permission" to wear that tartan. According to the Scottish Tartans Authority – which is an establishment of the Scottish tartan industry – the Balmoral tartan should not be worn by anyone who is not part of the British royal family. Even so, some weavers outside of the United Kingdom ignore the "longstanding convention" of the British royal family's "right" to this tartan. The society also claims that non-royals who wear this tartan are treated with "great disdain" by the Scottish tartan industry.


Generally, a more liberal attitude had been taken by those in the business of selling tartan, holding that anyone may wear any tartan they like. Under the liberal view, claimed "rules" are mere conventions (some of which are recent creations), with different levels of importance depending on the symbolic meaning of the tartan on some particular occasion.


The Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs has also taken a fairly flexible position (organisationally; some specific individual chiefs may have a narrower or looser take, and not all chiefs are members). Aside from opposing the creation of a new tartan using a clan's name without the chief's permission, their website states (adopting more loosely some ideas from the Lord Lyon view):


There are no strict rules on who has the right to wear a particular tartan. People normally wear only the tartan (if any) of their surname, or a "district tartan" connected with where they live or where their family come from. Wearing a particular clan tartan indicates that the wearer bears an allegiance to the chief of that clan.

Some Highland-dress historians have taken a dim view of regulatory intents and proclamations with regard to tartans; Scottish National Portrait Gallery curator A. E. Haswell Miller wrote that "to claim special entitlement to a tartan in the same manner as heraldic arms is certainly absurd", because evidence suggests that the idea was just invented by writers of the late 18th to mid-19th centuries. Sir Thomas Dick Lauder expressed similar views as far back as 1829, right in the middle of the "clan tartanry" rush, dismissing both the then-new adoption of "official" clan tartans and attempts by clans to claim regimental ones.


In other cultures

While tartan has been most closely associated with Scotland, and dating back to the Roman period was perhaps associated with Northwestern Europe in general, it is likely that the idea of using patterns of rectangles and lines has independently occurred many times, in any cultures with weaving. Basic tartan "is almost as primitive a weave as it is possible to make ... probably the earliest form of patterened fabric anywhere." Surviving pre-modern historical examples seem sparse, however.


Modern tartan-style cloth in a wide variety of materials and patterns from simple to complex is available and used today around the world, often simply as a style of cloth and without any association with Scotland.


Africa

Maasai shúkà

Among the Maasai people of Kenya and Tanzania, the shúkà is a cotton blanket-like garment (what Scots would call a plaid) worn as a wrap, and very commonly in a tartan pattern, though sometimes linearly striped or of one colour. Shúkà are predominantly red, though sometimes seen in blue and other colours.


Shúkà were originally of painted (typically red) leather, but Maasai have had access to plain-weave cotton fabric for some time, imported to the region by Americans since the 1860s. Joseph Thomas Last, a British missionary, in 1883 described the Maasai as particularly fond of red and white cloth, to be worn by higher-status men (though he did not mention tartan in particular); a 1903 report also had them typically wearing red blanket-like garments, after a time of favouring blue. The Maasai were loosely allied with the British, 1895–1904, and the latter made heavy use of Scottish regiments in African conflicts, bringing tartan with them. However, "Guinea cloth" (mostly produced in India), sometimes red and blue checked, was a common commodity in 18th-century western Africa, pre-dating British West Africa; whether it relates at all to shúkà is unknown. Shúkà patterns usually lack the thin black lines common in Scottish tartans.


A nomadic cattle-pastoralist culture, without their own weaving tradition, the Maasai have been described as unusually culturally conservative and resistant to modernisation. Nevertheless, they have always engaged in trade to get goods they do not make themselves, and have made local traditional use of modern materials. The Maasai approach has been to resist yet assimilate colonial and post-colonial influences.


Although there is evidence of tartan usage among the Maasai to at least the period 1906–1918, when Walther Dobbertin photographed a tartan shúkà in what was then German East Africa, the current bright tartan and striped style of shúkà appears to have been adopted primarily in the 1960s (partly in response to national-level clothing modernisation pressure), supplanting leather but keeping the same form-factor. The shift in outward form without affecting function led one writer to quip that Maasai dress "has undergone dramatic changes while not changing at all". Tartan-patterned cloth is not typically used for other Maasai garments besides shúkà.


The shúkà has become so emblematic of the Maasai that there is some discussion (driven by the Maasai themselves) at the national and regional level about protecting it as a form of cultural property. While it has been claimed that shúkà patterns, at least at one time, conveyed particular meanings, and there historically have long been weaving operations in various African areas, most shúkà today that are not mass-manufactured in Dar es Salaam or Mombasa actually come from China, not Africa.


East and South Asia

The earliest-discovered tartan fabric in the world was discovered in Western China, in the context of the Tarim mummies, dated to c. 2100 BC through the first centuries BC (See § Pre-medieval origins, above). Today, tartan is still woven in China, both as a traditional fabric and in large commercial quantities for export.


Bhutanese mathra

In Bhutan, traditional men's robes (gho) and knee-stockings (omso, similar to argyle socks), and women's dresses (kira) are traditional national costume styles that are largely mandatory for public dress since 1963. Tartan (generally called mathra or, after the district of its primary production, Bumthang mathra, among other names for specific patterns) is among the many common textile styles for these garments, some much more elaborate (generally called yathra) than tartan. The tartan cloths are woven traditionally in yak and sheep wool, but today also in cotton and raw silk.


Mathra is woven primarily with a red ground. Some specific tartan/plaid styles of Bhutan are: broad-checked thra bom; narrow-checked thra charuru; sethra ('golden pattern'), an orange or rust ground with yellow and sometimes black checks (with black, it is more specifically called sethra dokhana, and without, dalapgi sethra); red, blue, and black patterns on a white ground, in at least four varieties called pangtsi (specifically red and black on white), Decheling kamtham, and other names; and another style is named burai mathra. Some of these fabrics feature supplementary weft decorative patterns (flowers, etc.) added to the tartan, with an embroidered or brocaded appearance, generally called pesar ('new pattern'); one such style is more specifically called sethra metho chen, the yellow-orange pattern with flowers added. There are also patterns of simple linear stripes that do not cross each other (generally called adha mathra or aikapur), with various names for specific styles.


Indian madras

Madras is a patterned, light-weight, breatheable, cotton cloth named for the Madras (now Chennai) area of India. Traditional madras is hand-woven from lumpy, carded-cotton thread, and coloured with natural dyes which may bleed together upon washing to create a more muted pattern than typical tartan, as well as a rougher texture. Madras also has a "softer" look because it typically lacks the black lines found in most Scottish tartans. Madras cloth dates to at least the 16th century, produced in a variety of patterns, including religious designs and floral prints. It is unclear if tartan patterns were among the original designs, though they became very popular later. Weaving, primarily for export, in Madras/Chennai became a large-scale commercial enterprise after the British East India Company came to control the area in the mid-17th century. Major production of this style of cloth also took place in Cambay State (present-day Gujarat).


Madras, ideal for warm-weather wear, became popular in the Philippines (where it is known as cambaya) and the Caribbean; mainly in undyed form, it was also exported to Europe. Tartan madras reached America by 1718, and appeared in the 1897 Sears catalogue. It was popular in the United States in the 1930s and again in the 1960s, often associated with preppy style. Substantial export of the cloth to South Africa began in 1958.


Modern madras cloth is commonly in tartan patterns, but also simply striped (seersucker). Unlike Scottish-style tartan, madras is not woven in 2/2 twill pattern, but is a muslin of plain weave; it thus, when viewed up close, features a "pepper and salt" colour mixture where colours cross (a dot matrix, technically), not staggered diagonal lines (see detail image). It also usually lacks black lines.


Japanese kōshi

In Japan, tartan patterns called kōshi 格子 (also koushi or goushi, literally
'lattice') or kōshijima 格子縞 date back to at least the 18th century, possibly the 17th in the Edo period (1603–1867), and were popular for kabuki theatrical costuming, which inspired general public use by both sexes, for the kosode (precursor of the kimono),
the obi, and other garments. The name is a reference to the details of shoji room dividers, the grid pattern said to stand for strength, with larger stripes representing more power.
Kōshi range from simple checked patterns to complex multi-colour weaves. Ikat thread-dyeing techniques were sometimes employed before the weaving, such that a colour in the pattern was mottled, and parts of the design may sometimes have been embroidered, supplementary-woven, or dyed-over for additional highlight or contrast. Some styles have particular names, such as misuji-kōshi ('three-striped lattice') and futasuji-kōshi ('forked lattice'). A pattern with larger squares is more generally called ogoshi or with smaller squares kogoshi.


It is unclear whether there was a Scottish tartan influence on the development of kōshi. The Edo period pre-dates the Perry Expedition of 1853–1854 and its opening of Japan to general Western trade, but mostly post-dates early European contact from 1543 to the closure of Japan to outsiders in 1639 under the sakoku isolationist policy.


Nothing suggests that particular patterns have been associated with specific families or Japanese clans.


Today, kōshijima is the general Japanese word for 'tartan/plaid, checked pattern'. Tartan is popular in present-day Japan, both for high fashion and for streetwear, as well as school uniforms. Since the 1960s, the Japanese department store chain Isetan has used an emblematic tartan as a marketing tool (e.g. on all its shopping bags); the pattern is based on some MacMillan tartans. Japan hosted a major museum exhibit about tartan in 2018.


Eastern Europe to Western Asia

Tartan-style patterns are common throughout Southeastern Europe.


John Francis Campbell (1862) described the native weaving of the Sámi (Lapps) of northern Europe as being hand-loom tartan.


Considerably to the southeast, the Tatars and Chuvash, Turkic peoples of Tatarstan and Chuvashia, respectively, in the Russian Federation, have worn tartan, striped, and other patterns since at least the 19th century.


Russian shotlandka

Robert Jamieson, writing in 1818 as editor of Edmund Burt's 1727–1737 Letters of a Gentleman in the North of Scotland, said that in his era, married women of the north-western provinces of Russia wore tartan plaids "of massy silk, richly varied, with broad cross-bars of gold and silver tissue". This seems quite distinct from Scottish-style construction.


The Russian poet Alexander Pushkin (1799–1837), who was influenced by the romantic-Highlands writings of Walter Scott, posed for one of the most famous paintings in Russia, the 1827 portrait by Orest Kiprensky. Pushkin wears what looks at first like a Scottish-style tartan shoulder plaid, but is more probably a sleeveless "Almaviva" cape/cloak, a style in fashion at the time and known to have been worn by Pushkin.


Tartan was commented on in the Moscow Telegraph in 1826 as being in broad fashion in the city for all sorts of garments (often as a decorative accent). Scottish-style plaids apparently did come into some fashion in Russia as women's wear for a space during the mid-to-late 19th century, a style picked up from stage productions; some 19th century Russian paintings illustrate use of plaids as shawls. Tartan (and plain-striped) shawls were also common among the Volga Germans and Bessarabia Germans in Russia; a mixture of hand-woven (originally as bedclothes and other household goods) and mass-produced in Russia, the shawls became emblematic of the German-from-Russia diaspora in North and South America from the nineteenth century to the mid-20th.


Around the end of the 19th century, the Russian equivalent of Regency and Victorian British tartanware objects, such as decorative Fedoskino boxes with tartan accents in a style called Shotlandka Шотландка (literally 'Scotlandish'), were produced by companies like the Lukutin Manufactory on the outskirts of Moscow.


Today, shotlandka or shotlandki шотландки are simply Russian words for 'tartan/plaid' generally.


Oceania

Adoption by the Māori

Pōtatau Te Wherowhero, the first Māori king, adopted a particular house tartan with design elements symbolizing his ancestry, such as inner stripes representing migration canoes that first arrived in Aotearoa New Zealand; this tartan was presented by his descendant Tūheitia Paki to Charles III in the former's visit to Buckingham Palace in May 2023. His following tribes concentrated around Northland have also adopted green tartans.


See also

Patterns

Notes

References

Citations

Sources

External links



Anime-influenced animation is a type of non-Japanese work of animation that is noticeably similar to or inspired by anime. Generally, the term anime refers to a style of animation originating from Japan. As Japanese anime became increasingly popular, Western animation studios began implementing some visual stylizations typical in anime—such as exaggerated facial expressions, "super deformed" versions of characters, and white radial lines appearing on the screen when something shocking, frightening, distressing, or terrifying happens or when someone screams or when someone panics.


Although outside Japan, anime is specifically used to mean animation from Japan or as a Japanese-disseminated animation style often characterized by colorful graphics, vibrant characters and fantastical themes, there is a debate over whether the culturally abstract approach to the word's meaning may open up the possibility of anime produced in countries other than Japan. Additionally, all these anime-influenced series have become defined as "anime" by some sources, in an attempt to classify all Japanese-anime styled works of non-Japanese origin.


Americas

United States

Television

One of the first noted attempts from American companies on making a series visually inspired by anime was The King Kong Show in the late 1960s and early 1970s. It was the result of a collaboration between Toei Animation from Japan and Videocraft from America. The result was an animation with an anime-like visual style and a Japanese kaiju theme, that incorporated the art style of the Hanna-Barbera era in American TV animation. Likewise, note that Hanna-Barbera's earlier series Frankenstein Jr. was heavily influenced by the Gigantor anime series, although its art style was more similar to that of other American cartoons of the time. Another early example of this might be The Smokey Bear Show, Johnny Cypher in Dimension Zero, Challenge of the GoBots, Hong Kong Phooey, and Frosty the Snowman.


Rankin/Bass Productions, in addition to collaborating with Toei Animation to make The King Kong Show, is also known for collaborating with Japanese anime studios to make several famous Christmas movies, such as Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer (1964), Frosty the Snowman (1969), Santa Claus is Comin' to Town (1970), Here Comes Peter Cottontail (1971), 'Twas the Night Before Christmas (1974), The Year Without a Santa Claus (1974), The First Easter Rabbit (1976), Frosty's Winter Wonderland (1976), Rudolph's Shiny New Year (1976), The Easter Bunny is Comin' to Town (1977), Nestor, the Long-Eared Christmas Donkey (1977), The Stingiest Man in Town (1978), Jack Frost (1979), Rudolph and Frosty's Christmas in July (1979), Pinocchio's Christmas (1980), and Frosty Returns (1992). Many of those Christmas movies were created by Arthur Rankin Jr. and Jules Bass, and features traditional animation, though not usually being styled as anime in the traditional sense, instead of the typical stop motion animation most often used by the company.


Toei Animation continued this type of collaboration in the Transformers TV series and its associated film, both of which aired in the 1980s. While Transformers was co-produced with Toei Animation, who handled several stages of the animation production process, the series was ultimately written in the United States. Transformers showed many influences and elements of anime including story, themes, and a style that resembled Mecha anime.


This trend continued throughout the 1980s with series and movies like Dungeons & Dragons, X-Men: Pryde of the X-Men, Spider-Man, Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends, Inhumanoids, Jem, Voltron, Voltron: Fleet of Doom, GoBots: Battle of the Rock Lords, Defenders of the Earth, The Adventures of the American Rabbit, The Glo Friends, Sky Commanders, Hello Kitty's Furry Tale Theater, The Real Ghostbusters, Superman, and Police Academy, all projects that were also co-produced by Toei Animation. Throughout the 1980s and the 1990s, many American shows started to be outsourced to Japanese artists and animators, most notably TMS Entertainment and Sunrise, which animated popular television productions such as Inspector Gadget, The Real Ghostbusters, Mighty Orbots, Rainbow Brite, The Adventures of the Galaxy Rangers, Bionic Six, Tiny Toon Adventures, DuckTales, Chip 'n Dale: Rescue Rangers, Animaniacs, The Littles, The New Adventures of Zorro, Dennis the Menace, Spider-Man: The Animated Series, Batman: The Animated Series, and Superman: The Animated Series, most of which visually or thematically were not reminiscent of Japanese anime. TaleSpin (the animation was done at Walt Disney Animation Japan) did, however, take inspiration from Hayao Miyazaki's 1989 manga Hikōtei Jidai.


At the same time, Godzilla: The Series is technically an adaptation of the American Godzilla movie, but has plentiful references to the Japanese films and has a more directly anime-looking aesthetic throughout the show. Godzilla himself is made to look more in line with his earlier Japanese design.


Return to the Planet of the Apes, based on the Planet of the Apes franchise, is an American cartoon series that follows the Vietnam War and Cold War themes prominent in Planet of the Apes and Beneath the Planet of the Apes as opposed to the fantasy elements found in later films, of which the cartoon itself has referenced. The animation is designed in such a way that looks somewhat similar to the works of Toei Animation and Madhouse Studios.


American animator, writer, and television producer Butch Hartman, best known for creating the Nickelodeon cartoons The Fairly OddParents, The Jimmy Timmy Power Hour, Danny Phantom, T.U.F.F. Puppy, Bunsen Is a Beast, and  The Fairly OddParents: A New Wish, has frequently implemented the use of anime elements and references throughout his work, and his animation and character design is characterized by fluid action sequences, large eyes, comic-book or colorful artwork and backgrounds, and exaggerated facial expressions, which is common in a typical anime. Adding onto their closeness to anime, some episodes from The Fairly OddParents and Danny Phantom even directly reference anime in some way, particularly parodying styles from Hello Kitty and Speed Racer.


There are various other notable examples of cartoon series with an strong anime influence, including X-Men: The Animated Series (including X-Men '97), RoboCop: The Animated Series, Men in Black: The Series, Back to the Future: The Animated Series, Beetlejuice: The Animated Series, Gargoyles, Æon Flux, The Pirates of Dark Water, The Tick, Todd McFarlane's Spawn, Samurai Jack, X-Men: Evolution, The Venture Bros., (including the film The Venture Bros.: Radiant Is the Blood of the Baboon Heart), Metalocalypse, (including the film Metalocalypse: Army of the Doomstar,) Teen Titans, (including the films Teen Titans: Trouble in Tokyo and Teen Titans Go! vs. Teen Titans), Justice League, Justice League Unlimited, Exosquad, Megas XLR, Loonatics Unleashed, The Jackie Chan Adventures, The Spectacular Spider-Man, Batman: The Brave and the Bold, Xiaolin Showdown, Xiaolin Chronicles, Spaceballs: The Animated Series Wolverine and the X-Men, The Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, Avengers Assemble, Guardians of the Galaxy, Neo Yokio, Seis Manos, Blood of Zeus, Invincible, Primal, and Twilight of the Gods.


Batman Beyond displayed some characteristics of anime; in particular, some of its production processes were outsourced to Japan. Glen Murakami was also a strong influence in inspiring American cartoons with Japanese elements. He animated alongside Bruce Timm on Batman: The Animated Series and its sequel, Batman: Beyond. Keeping the sharp-edged angular style of Timm and mixing in his own personal influences, the show was given cyberpunk and sci-fi elements with a Japanese twist.


American television producer Sam Register – who created anime inspired works such as Ben 10, its sequel Alien Force, Transformers Animated, Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated, Beware the Batman, Mike Tyson Mysteries, Unikitty!, Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi – also worked alongside Murakami to create the Teen Titans television show in 2003, giving rise to a unique style referred to as "murakanime". In 2004, Murakami also produced The Batman, which showed much stronger anime influence than even its predecessor Batman Beyond. Later, in 2013, Murakami produced Teen Titans Go!, which was given a stronger Japanese influence than even its predecessor, with it animation and visuals being heavily reminiscent of chibis.


Super Robot Monkey Team Hyperforce Go! is the first Jetix original show to be produced by Japanese artists and use an anime concept for the characters, including a transformation sequence for the series' main protagonist, Chiro.


Avatar: The Last Airbender and its sequel series The Legend of Korra are other examples of American series influenced by anime so heavily that they started discussions among fans and viewers about what anime is and whether a non-Japanese animation should be called anime. Avatar creators Bryan Konietzko and Michael Dante DiMartino confirmed an anime influence in a magazine interview; that of "Hayao Miyazaki, especially Spirited Away and Princess Mononoke" as well as My Neighbor Totoro. Other studios from which inspiration was drawn include Studio 4°C, Production I.G, Polygon Pictures and Studio Ghibli.


The same strong resemblance can be seen in Voltron: Legendary Defender, a reboot of the Voltron franchise, this time produced completely by American artists. Lauren Montgomery and Joaquim Dos Santos, both known for their work on the Avatar: The Last Airbender series and its sequel The Legend of Korra, served as showrunners while fellow crew member Tim Hedrick served as head writer.


The American sitcom The Boondocks has many anime-style features and uses Japanese style fighting. It is shown in many scenes, as Japanese sword styles have been used. Additionally, the aesthetics are notably very similar to Japanese animation, due to the series being partially outsourced to Japanese and Korean artists, most notably Madhouse Studios. However, despite this, Madhouse was never credited with its involvement with the cartoon.


Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. and Moon Girl and Devil Dinosaur both have many anime-style features, especially through their animation and art style, and as such each of the cartoons have plentiful references, particularly the characters' reaction shots and the fight sequences. Ultimate Spider-Man and Spidey and His Amazing Friends both go further with the anime references by including the Japanese chibi on the characters, which occurs throughout both cartoon series; there were multiple episodes in Ultimate Spider-Man that involved the characters becoming exclusively made as chibis similar to the style used in Teen Titans Go!, Thundercats Roar, and RWBY Chibi.


The web series RWBY, produced by Texas-based company Rooster Teeth premiered in July 2013, is produced using an anime-heavily influenced art style and has been referred to as an American anime by multiple sources. For example, when the series was licensed for release in Japan, AdWeek reported on the situation using the headline "American-made anime from Rooster Teeth gets licensed in Japan". The CEO of Rooster Teeth, Matt Hullum, commented on the licensing agreement, saying "This is the first time any American-made anime has been marketed to Japan. It definitely usually works the other way around, and we're really pleased about that." In 2013, Monty Oum, the creator of RWBY, said "Some believe just like Scotch needs to be made in Scotland, an American company can't make anime because it's impossible at all. I think that's a narrow way of seeing it. Anime is an art form, and to say only one country can make this art is wrong." Furthermore, RWBY was often dubbed in Japanese version, and even got a 2016 spin-off series RWBY Chibi, which depicts the characters in the style and appearance of chibi and depicts them in situations akin to that of typical of Japanese chibi parodies. Eventually, in 2022, RWBY was given an actual Japanese animation called Ice Queendom, making it one of the very first anime-based cartoons to have actually developed a true Japanese animation based on an American project.


The Powerpuff Girls cartoon series, as well as its reboot and film adaptation were all heavily influenced by anime to begin with, with the three main characters being obvious examples. For this, the franchise was revered by not just American viewers, which was its intended target audience, but also Japanese viewers as well. As a result of the cartoon's major popularity in Japan, the show was given an anime spin-off known as Z that debuted on July 1, 2006. The Z spinoff is loosely based on the original cartoon, with plot details and characters very similar to their depiction from the cartoon. The Powerpuff Girls stands as one of the very first anime-based cartoons to have actually developed a true Japanese animation based on an American project.


Rick and Morty was already heavily influenced by Japanese anime, and has multiple references throughout many episodes. Due to the cartoon's resulting popularity in Japan, the series was given an actual anime adaptation, making Rick and Morty one of the few examples of an American cartoon to have a Japanese anime adaptation. The Japanese version was first released as five short films from March 29, 2020, to November 12, 2021. Each of those short films depict the characters in Japanese settings, ranging from samurai and Neon Genesis Evangelion to even other anime-based projects such as Pacific Rim. The series aired on Adult Swim starting from August 16, 2024. The series is written and directed by Takashi Sano.


The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise, despite being an American IP, has been frequently implementing Japanese culture and anime elements since its very inception, mainly due to its ninjutsu and samurai themes. These references have been repeatedly featured in its various media, especially their animated projects, with the 1987, 2003, and 2012 TV series featuring various anime-inspired aesthetics and moments, some of the most notable examples being seen in the characters' reaction shots and the action sequences. In addition, a parody of the anime series Voltron: Defender of the Universe was featured within the 2012 series throughout its second season, titled Super Robo Mecha Force Five! The franchise's animated films TMNT, Turtles Forever, and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem only further their anime similarities and references by utilizing plotlines akin to that of a samurai film and isekai anime. Of all the cartoons, Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and its film adaptation are the most strongly influenced by anime visuals and iconography, using imagery and animation similar to that of Japanese studios such as Studio Trigger. Most recently, in 2024, Tales of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, while a sequel series following Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem, follows the movie's similar anime-style animation formatting. Ultimately, the franchise even has its own anime series, that of Mutant Turtles: Superman Legend, a two-part original video animation made as part of marketing on the success of the 1987 cartoon series. However, until relatively recently, the anime remains obscure and completely unavailable to find on American stores or media sources, therefore it was one of the more lesser known adaptations from the franchise.


G.I. Joe, despite it being primarily and notably an American cartoon, film, and toy line franchise, is notable for having quite a handful of anime influences in their animations. The first and most notable example, G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero, both the first and second seasons, as well as the film adaptation, were all outsourced in Japan by the studio Toei Animation, who was also known for making The Transformers. The second, G.I. Joe: Sigma 6, was actually the closest known G.I. Joe property to ever be translated into Japanese animation in any form despite it still being an American cartoon; it was animated by the Japanese studio Gonzo, and it was produced by 4Kids Productions in America. Third, G.I. Joe: Resolute was a web series produced by Titmouse, Inc., and the animation was noted to be extremely similar to that of Avatar: The Last Airbender and the works of Madhouse Studios, especially its character designs and fight scenes. Finally, the most recent one to date, G.I. Joe: Renegades, despite it being primarily an American cartoon, had plenty of anime references, particularly its frequent usage of Ninja culture and stylized fight choreography.


ThunderCats, both its 1985 and 2011 cartoons, are outsourced and produced by Japanese animators, like that of Studio 4°C, and thus both cartoons have several references and visuals reminiscent to anime all throughout. The most recent one, Roar, made in 2020, even has a chibi-stye animation similar to the style used in Teen Titans Go!.


Ballmastrz: 9009 is an American-Japanese television series aired on Adult Swim and its animation produced by Titmouse, Inc., Williams Street, and Studio 4°C. When the animators were discussing the artistic direction of the series, Chris Prynoski, president of Titmouse said that the show's animation was made "like it was drawn by High School kids who try to draw anime". For the Ballmastrz: Rubicon special, series creator and voice actor Christy Karacas intended for the special to "dive into the actual anime world," using the teams from the Japanese animation studio Studio 4 °C for this express purpose.


The Mexican-American Onyx Equinox, created by Sofia Alexander, and the American High Guardian Spice, created by Raye Rodriguez, are both Western cartoons that were released on Crunchyroll, a streaming platform that typically features Japanese anime shows and manga. Both series are notably extremely similar to Japanese anime, taking visual cues from Avatar: The Last Airbender, its sequel The Legend of Korra, and She-Ra and the Princesses of Power, and were also produced by South Korean animation company DR Movie.


Disney Channel and Disney XD's Kim Possible, Tron: Uprising, Gravity Falls, Star vs. the Forces of Evil, Amphibia, and The Owl House are all American-made cartoons, but it is notable for having some obvious anime influences regardless, in part due to the six being partially influenced by anime such as Sailor Moon and Dragon Ball Z, as well as the animation art style of Hanna-Barbera and Chuck Jones cartoons and the futuristic setting and styling of the Tron franchise; each animation are characterized by large, expressive eyes, colorful hair on several characters (particularly to match the cartoon's otherworldly setting), animation patterns, sleek appearances, fluid movements, and their storylines heavily mirroring that of isekai works. Amphibia, Gravity Falls, and The Owl House in particular were animated by the collaborations of Rough Draft Korea; a studio known for making many famous cartoons, as well as Sunmin Image Pictures, Sugarcube Animation, Digital eMation and Yearim Productions. The Owl House creator Dana Terrace had said that the visual style was inspired by paintings by Remedios Varo, John Bauer, and Hieronymus Bosch, as well as Russian architecture. James Turner, a British illustrator most well known for his work on the Pokémon series of games (having created several Pokémon designs and worked as the art director for Pokémon Sword and Shield), provided artwork during the initial stages of Amphibia. Amphibia's visuals were inspired by Jim Henson's 1982 film The Dark Crystal and the 1977 animated adaptation of The Hobbit. Also, the look of the Tron: Uprising series was inspired by Star Wars: The Clone Wars,  ThunderCats, and Aeon Flux. Director Charlie Bean explained 'the idea was to create a distinct style for the CG show not seen elsewhere on television or in film.' To ensure this goal would manifest itself, he worked closely with art director Alberto Mielgo, character designer Robert Valley, who was also the animation artist for the Gorillaz music videos, and lead vehicle designer Daniel Simon, who was previously responsible for many vehicle designs in the Tron: Legacy feature film, including the light cycles.


Steven Universe, as well as its television film adaptation and Future, are notable for possessing anime aesthetics resembling that from Dragon Ball Z and especially the works of Osamu Tezuka and Harvey Kurtzman. Most notably, the protagonist team, the Crystal Gems, are directly inspired and modeled after magical girls, and there are plenty of references to anime throughout the original and sequel shows. As for anime influences, series creator Rebecca Sugar has cited Whisper of the Heart as her "absolute favorite" film and as a major influence on her work, even providing an introduction for screenings in July 2019. She also cited the anime series Revolutionary Girl Utena as an "epiphany" for her, by playing with "the semiotics of gender" and called it beautiful, funny, and extreme, having a huge influence on her, and noted the "huge Takarazuka Theater influence" in Steven Universe. Additionally, she described Neon Genesis Evangelion, Sailor Moon, Dragon Ball, Tengen Toppa Gurren Lagann, Captain Harlock, Kiki's Delivery Service, and Initial D as major influences. There was even an episode in the series’s fourth season, "Mindful Education", that had direct animation assistance from Japanese animation company Studio Trigger. Furthering the cartoon's similarity to Japanese animation, the manga series Land of the Lustrous and its television series adaptation animated by Orange are shown to be somewhat based on Steven Universe, particularly in terms of plot, characters, and visuals. However, this similarity and whether or not it is a direct adaptation of the show itself, or whether they are related at all, has been heavily debated and used as a point of contention to fans and critics alike.


My Life as a Teenage Robot, in a somewhat similar manner to that of its fellow Nickelodeon cartoons Avatar: The Last Airbender series and its sequel The Legend of Korra, uses plentiful anime elements. Unlike the aforementioned two, these anime references are not as noticeable as that the ordinary human characters have a Western aesthetic, but the robot and alien characters, especially the main character Jenny herself, have large eyes and use facial expressions that are regularly used in anime. One episode notably depicts Jenny traveling to Japan and after losing her language OS disc, she was only able to speak Japanese for almost its entirety. The series also is known for having Japanese-American voice actors, such as Jenny's voice actress, Janice Kawaye.


OK K.O.! Let's Be Heroes (2017–2019), made by Steven Universe's co-developer Ian Jones-Quartey, is another example of a Western cartoon being heavily similar to actual Japanese anime. The show's animation and aesthetics are extremely similar to that of anime and video games, with plenty of references for both. The cartoon is actually partially outsourced to Japanese and Korean artists, with the title sequence produced by the co-founder of Studio Trigger, Hiroyuki Imaishi, and its animation produced in South Korea by Digital eMation and Sunmin Image Pictures.


Of all the cartoon installments to the Spider-Man franchise, including the 1981 Spider-Man series, Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends, Spider-Man: The Animated Series, Spider-Man Unlimited, Spider-Man: The New Animated Series, The Spectacular Spider-Man, Ultimate Spider-Man, Spidey and His Amazing Friends, and Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man, all of which were already somewhat stylized in an anime format and have been frequently mistaken as a genuine anime as a result, it is the 2017 Spider-Man series in particular that is the most thematically and visually similar to anime, especially through the character design, action sequences, and reaction shots. Its animation style is especially similar to that of other anime-inspired works, taking visual cues from She-Ra and the Princesses of Power, High Guardian Spice, Avatar: The Last Airbender, its sequel The Legend of Korra, and Voltron: Legendary Defender. However, every single one of the specific Spider-Man cartoons, including the 2017 series, are done in a Western art style and are made in the United States.


ND Stevenson and the crew of She-Ra and the Princesses of Power were strongly influenced by anime, especially those with magical girls.


DC Superhero Girls was already heavily inspired by anime despite the web series and franchise consisting of direct-to-video and television films all primarily having an American art style and animation format. However, the 2019 reboot is even further inspired by anime through the art style and fluid animation alone, which was because of the creator Lauren Faust using the similar art style she used for another one of her anime-inspired, and most famous, works, that of My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic.


Thomas & Friends: All Engines Go is an American-Canadian animated reboot series based on the Thomas and Friends franchise, with its animation style being easily comparable to that of Japanese anime. While it is unknown as to whether this similarity is intended, the cartoon series’ fluid animation, facial expressions, and visual design in particular can be noticed on some kodomomuke works.


Skull Island is the first television series of the Monsterverse franchise and a sequel to Kong: Skull Island (2017). The series follows the same distinction as other installments of the King Kong franchise in terms of being heavily inspired by Japanese anime, even though the series is made entirely in the United States. Another series in the franchise that has that same distinction of being based on anime despite it being an American cartoon is The King Kong Show. The series was produced by Powerhouse Animation and Legendary Television with animation services provided by Studio Mir, the same studio that animated other notable anime-inspired shows like The Legend of Korra, Voltron: Legendary Defender, Kipo and the Age of Wonderbeasts, Dota: Dragon's Blood, Skull Island, and the fourth and final season of The Boondocks. Additionally, it was developed as part of a partnership between Netflix and Legendary Entertainment.


My Adventures with Superman was primarily an American production, but was thematically and visually inspired by Japanese anime, with its animation and aesthetics heavily reminiscent to that of a shonen anime. The show was animated by Studio Mir in South Korea, the same studio that animated other notable anime-inspired shows like The Legend of Korra, Voltron: Legendary Defender, Kipo and the Age of Wonderbeasts, Dota: Dragon's Blood, Skull Island, and the fourth and final season of The Boondocks. It was sometimes known as the American version of One-Punch Man and My Hero Academia, and the series has been frequently compared to the two and various other similar anime projects. Major influences for the series include the 1986 comic book limited series The Man of Steel, as well as the works of Dan Jurgens, Jon Bogdanove, and Louise Simonson. Additionally, Superman's transformation sequence is particularly inspired by Pretty Cure, specifically Cure Mermaid from Go! Princess PreCure.


AMC+ created an anime-styled cartoon, Pantheon (2022–2023), which follows the format and style as other anime-inspired cartoons with the same genre, such as Love, Death & Robots, Pacific Rim: The Black, and Batman Beyond, as well as other cyberpunk television shows like Altered Carbon and Black Mirror. Pantheon is AMC's first hour-long animated drama original series. The series is created by Craig Silverstein who also executive produced the series. AMC Studios and Titmouse, Inc. are involved with producing and animating the series. The series is based on Ken Liu's short stories "The Gods Will Not Be Chained", "The Gods Will Not Be Slain", "The Gods Have Not Died in Vain", "Staying Behind", "Altogether Elsewhere, Vast Herds of Reindeer" and "Seven Birthdays" from the short fictions collection The Hidden Girl and Other Stories.


Scavengers Reign, based on the original 2016 short film of the same name, is a 12-episode American anime-styled series that was released on Max and Netflix. It was produced over two years by Titmouse, Inc. and Green Street Pictures and notably consisted a crew including international animators working remotely from locations including Mexico, Spain, Portugal and France.


The Hazbin Hotel cartoon series and its web spinoff Helluva Boss have been frequently interpreted by viewers and fans as an anime despite both shows being made in the United States and is therefore an American cartoon. According to series creator Vivienne Medrano, both animated series got their primary influence from other American cartoons, such as Disney's movies and Broadway musicals. That said, both also possess plentiful anime references, particularly in terms of animation, visual effects, character design, and iconography, making Hazbin Hotel and Helluva Boss recent examples of American cartoons being comparable to that of actual Japanese anime.


The Legend of Vox Machina, based on the web series Critical Role, is reminiscent of an isekai work. The animation also adds as plentiful anime elements and references, especially using them into the character design, action sequences, and reaction shots. The series also includes a few notable references to the Dragon Ball franchise being added. Additionally, many of the voice actors have voiced roles in actual anime projects. Released on Amazon Prime Video, it is written by Jennifer Muro, and animated by Titmouse, Inc, a studio of which is already noted for creating other anime-based works.


Film

Even though it derived from an American comic strip, Little Nemo: Adventures in Slumberland was animated by the Japanese company Tokyo Movie Shinsha and thus is often considered an anime film, although it was a joint production of Japanese and American animators and production companies. Despite being infamously trapped in development hell for much of the 1980s, many notable people were involved with the film's production at some point before dropping out, with the workers coming from Disney, Lucasfilm, Warner Bros. Animation, and Studio Ghibli. Those who expressed interest in or were involved at some stage of the film's development included George Lucas, Chuck Jones, Ray Bradbury, Isao Takahata, Brad Bird, Jerry Rees, Chris Columbus, Ken Anderson, Frank Thomas, Oliver Johnston, Paul Julian, Osamu Dezaki, Andy Gaskill, Roger Allers, the Sherman Brothers (Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman), Hayao Miyazaki (who was working at TMS at the time), and Gary Kurtz.


The production on The Animatrix began when the Wachowskis visited some of the creators of the anime films that had been strong influences on their work, and decided to collaborate with them. After the success of The Animatrix, companies such as Lionsgate, Warner Bros., DC Entertainment, Sony Pictures, Legendary Television, Skydance Television, Disney+, Netflix, Lucasfilm, 343 Industries, and Amazon Prime Video all decided to take advantage of its success by using other films and comics to make their own adaptations directly influenced by Japanese animation or have also been done in an anthology format, such as Hellboy Animated, Van Helsing: The London Assignment, Revisioned: Tomb Raider, Batman: Gotham Knight, Ultraviolet: Code 044, Halo Legends, Underworld: Endless War, Love, Death & Robots, Pacific Rim: The Black, Bright: Samurai Soul, Star Wars: Visions, What If?, The Boys Presents: Diabolical, Terminator Zero, and Predator: Killer of Killers.


Universal Home Video and Japanese animation studio Gonzo even personally tried to replicate the same animation process that was used from The Animatrix, which led to the creation of Gankutsuou: The Count of Monte Cristo and The Chronicles of Riddick: Dark Fury. The two projects were notably produced through collaborations with Mahiro Maeda and Peter Chung, both of whom had worked in The Animatrix.


Starship Troopers, including the novel made by Robert A. Heinlein and then the movie franchise created by Edward Neumeier and Paul Verhoeven, had already spawned several animated projects, including Roughnecks: Starship Troopers Chronicles, itself heavily reminiscent of anime. Additionally, Starship Troopers was also unexpectedly popular in Japan, leading to the development of three separate animations from that country. The 1988 anime miniseries of the same name is the closest known adaptation of the novel and was produced by Japanese animation studio Sunrise. 24 years later, two Japanese-American direct-to-video CGI animated films, Invasion (2012) and Traitor of Mars (2017), were both designated to continue the storyline from the movie trilogy but through a different format than that of the typical live-action movies with CGI and stop motion. Both sequel films were created by Shinji Aramaki and Joseph Chou. Even with the animations involving the franchise, they each more or less satirize Western politics and military and glorifies gratuitous violence through dark comedy in a similar manner to that from the movies.


Blade Runner, based on the 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick, has two Japanese animated adaptations that are based on the movies: Black Out 2022, an anime short film made in 2017 by Shinichirō Watanabe, who is famous for directing other anime projects like Cowboy Bebop, Samurai Champloo, Carole & Tuesday, and Space Dandy; and Black Lotus, a CGI series made in 2021 by Kenji Kamiyama and Shinji Aramaki, both of whom have developed projects such as Starship Troopers: Invasion, Starship Troopers: Traitor of Mars, Appleseed, Appleseed Ex Machina, Viper's Creed, Halo Legends, Jin-Roh, Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex, Eien no 831, and Guardian of the Sacred Spirit. Both animated projects notably include "familiar" characters from the Blade Runner universe.


The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit, both created by English author J. R. R. Tolkien, have both been adapted into animated projects as early as in 1967; five of those animations have been completed through the efforts of Rankin-Bass and American animators Ralph Bakshi and Gene Deitch, and all of them were actually partially outsourced by British and Japanese artists and animators. The first was The Hobbit, a short film meant to be part of a larger scale animated project, but had never materialized. The first official animated adaptation was The Hobbit in 1977, made by Rankin Bass. The second was The Lord of the Rings in 1978, made by Bakshi as the first part of what was originally intended to be a two-part adaptation of the story. The third, The Return of the King was a 1980 television special again made by Rankin-Bass. All three animated films were heavily anime-based, despite being made in the United States for an American audience. Recently, in 2024, the closest, if not the first time, the franchise had ever been translated into Japanese animation was The War of the Rohirrim, which was a New Zealand-American-Japanese co-production. The film was repeatedly confirmed to be an anime as opposed to the previous animated projects and is depicted to be around 200 years before Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings (2001–2003) and The Hobbit (2012–2014) film trilogies. The War of the Rohirrim was produced by New Line Cinema, Warner Bros. Animation, Sola Entertainment, and WingNut Films.


Japanese anime has majorly influenced Disney, Pixar and DreamWorks productions. Glen Keane, the animator for successful Disney films such as The Black Cauldron (1985), The Little Mermaid (1989), Beauty and the Beast (1991), Aladdin (1992), and Tangled, has credited Hayao Miyazaki as a "huge influence" on Disney's animated films ever since The Rescuers Down Under (1990). Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise, the directors of Disney films such as Beauty and the Beast, Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996), and Atlantis: The Lost Empire (2001), are fans of anime and have cited Miyazaki's works as a major influence on their own work. Miyazaki's influence on Disney dates back to The Great Mouse Detective (1986), which was influenced by Miyazaki's Lupin III film Castle of Cagliostro (1979) and which in turn paved the way for the Disney Renaissance. It was especially inspired by the adventures of the 1994 Disney movie The Lion King Doraemon. In particular, Roger Allers had stated in an interview that he went to Japan before 1988, the year the production of The Lion King started, and that he was very impressed by the adventures in Doraemon, and that The Lion King was greatly influenced by Doraemon. Fujiko Fujio, despite the controversy, later thanked Disney in 1995 for being impressed by Disney's The Lion King and praising Doraemon.


Controversy surrounded another Disney film, Atlantis: The Lost Empire, which was alleged to have plagiarized the Studio Gainax anime series Nadia: The Secret of Blue Water (1990). Atlantis directors Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise denied the allegation, but nevertheless acknowledged Miyazaki's films as a major influence on their work.


Miyazaki's work deeply influenced Pixar co-founder John Lasseter, who described how Miyazaki's influence upon his life and work began when he first saw Castle of Cagliostro. Pete Docter, director of the popular Pixar films Monsters, Inc. (2001) and Up (2009) as well as a co-creator of other Pixar works, has also described anime, specifically Miyazaki, as an influence on his work. Jennifer Lee and Chris Buck cited the influence of Miyazaki's anime productions on Frozen (2013), stating that they were inspired by their sense of "epic adventure and that big scope and scale and then the intimacy of funny quirky characters." Chris Sanders and Dean DeBlois described Miyazaki's flight and pacifist themes as an influence for creating How to Train Your Dragon (2010). Joel Crawford, the director of Puss in Boots: The Last Wish (2022), cited Akira (1988) as an influence on the design of the characters and action within the film. Additionally, the film utilized 2D animation to "highlight the personal touch of hand-drawn animation that is found in traditional anime", as noted by Variety's Jazz Tangsay.


The DC Animated Movie Universe and Marvel Animated Features franchises of direct-to-video animations possesses plentiful anime-style or anime-based films, in no small part due to many of the films actually having their animation outsourced and produced by Japanese studios, such as Madhouse, Inc., TMS Entertainment, and Studio 4°C; notable examples of this distinction include Hulk vs., Planet Hulk, Thor: Tales of Asgard, Next Avengers: Heroes of Tomorrow, Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox, Justice League Doom, Green Lantern: First Flight, Green Lantern: Emerald Knights, Superman vs. The Elite, Superman: Unbound, Catwoman: Hunted, and many installments of the DC Universe Animated Original Movies.


Video games

Pac-Man, a Japanese video game franchise, has an American cartoon that was produced by Hanna-Barbera. Made in 1982, the cartoon was very faithful to the source material in terms of plotline, characters and their names, and references to the original games. It also stands out as the very first cartoon based on a video game, as well as the first cartoon to be based from a Japanese franchise. The cartoon's success also led to a Halloween special and a Christmas special that follows the same animation style and character design.


Captain N: The Game Master is a crossover cartoon series that focuses upon several video games that were originally created in Japan, including Kid Icarus, Mega Man, Castlevania, Donkey Kong, Metroid, The Adventures of Bayou Billy, Dragon Quest, The Legend of Zelda, and Wizards & Warriors, among others; the animation itself has been heavily styled by anime despite the series itself being predominantly an American media project.


While the Mario franchise is originally a Japanese IP, it also has popular influence in Italy, Canada, and the United States, which led to animated co-productions in the form of The Super Mario Bros. Super Show!, The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3, Super Mario World, and most recently, The Super Mario Bros. Movie. Meanwhile, in Mario's home country, Japan, numerous anime projects and a 1986 anime film have depicted the titular character and his brother, some of which actually follow the plot lines from the original video games.


While the Sonic the Hedgehog franchise is originally a Japanese IP, it also has popular influence in Italy, France, Canada, and the United States, which led to animated co-productions in the form of Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog (1993–1996), the TV series of the same name (1993–1994), Underground (1999), Boom (2014–2017) and Prime (2022–2024). Meanwhile, in Sonic's home country, Japan, two animated projects exist in form of the anime movie of the same name (1996), and X (2003–2005).


While Mega Man is a Japanese property to begin with, there are two animated television series featuring the titular character and is based on the franchise, Mega Man (1994), an American cartoon co-produced by Ruby-Spears Productions and Ashi Productions, and Fully Charged (2018), an American-Canadian CGI cartoon co-produced by Man of Action Studios, Dentsu Entertainment USA, and DHX Studios Vancouver. Both cartoons notably draw inspiration from the "Classic" series from the original video games.


While Street Fighter is a Japanese property to begin with, one particular animated television series based on the franchise, Street Fighter (1995), was primarily made in the United States and Canada. The cartoon was produced by Japanese artists, most notably Madhouse Studios and Sunrise, Inc., allowing itself for plentiful anime references and visuals, while also making references to the first movie and the earlier games.


PaRappa the Rapper is an example of a combination of anime, rap, and musical film elements; as a notable example of a Japanese and American artistry put together, the series was based off of the video game series of the same name created by Masaya Matsuura and Rodney Alan Greenblat. The series was produced by Fuji Television and SME Visual Works, animated by J.C.Staff, and first aired in Japan on Fuji Television.


While Final Fantasy is also a Japanese property to begin with, one particular animated movie based on the franchise, The Spirits Within (2001), was primarily made in the United States by Chris Lee and the franchise's creator Hironobu Sakaguchi and stands as the first full-length photorealistic computer-animated feature film ever made. Lee even compared The Spirits Within to that of Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, which by comparison was the first full-length cel animated film.


Resident Evil is originally a Japanese property, but is frequently mistaken to be American due to the popularity and prevalence of the franchise in the United States, which led to the creation of the film franchise and later the Netflix series of the same name. However, there are several English-language CGI-animated films to the franchise, making them easily labeled as anime due to all the films being primarily of Japanese origin. The anime-styled films  Biohazard 4D-Executer, Degeneration, Damnation, Vendetta, and Death Island, as well as the Netflix animated series Infinite Darkness, are all made in Japan and primarily marketed for American audiences. Unlike the film series or the Netflix series, all of the animations are set within the same universe as the original video game series.


Mortal Kombat has had several animated movies, many of which were aesthetically similar to that of anime, with some recent examples including Mortal Kombat Legends: Battle of the Realms, Mortal Kombat Legends: Cage Match, Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge, and Mortal Kombat Legends: Snow Blind.


Sin: The Movie is a 2000 original video animation released by ADV Films, adapted from the American video game of the same title. It is an example of a Japanese-American project that was directly based on a Western video game.


Tak and the Power of Juju is an American cartoon series loosely based on the 2003 video game of the same name and has quite a handful of anime visuals and aesthetics.


Devil May Cry is originally a Japanese franchise, with its very first animated adaptation being that of an actual anime miniseries produced by Madhouse Studios in 2007. However, eighteen years later, due to the franchise's popularity in America, Adi Shankar, one of the producers of the similarly anime-styled Castlevania, developed an American-South Korean anime-based series based on Devil May Cry, which was animated by Studio Mir in South Korea, the same studio that animated other notable anime-inspired shows like The Legend of Korra, Voltron: Legendary Defender, Kipo and the Age of Wonderbeasts, Dota: Dragon's Blood, Skull Island, and the fourth and final season of The Boondocks. The series was released on Netflix.


The American videogame Dante's Inferno, loosely based on Dante Alighieri's Divine Comedy, particularly Inferno, was adapted into a 2010 anime-based movie that was developed by the combined efforts of American, Japanese, and South Korean artists. Several known Korean and Japanese animation studios have done their part to contribute to this film, such as Production I.G, Dong Woo Animation, Manglobe, and Digital eMation.


The EA videogames Dead Space and Dead Space 2 has developed two animated films, Downfall (2008) and Aftermath (2011), both of which were released direct-to-video. Both films were aesthetically influenced by anime and were distributed by Manga Entertainment, which typically produces and distributes Japanese animation.


The popular BioWare and EA videogame franchises Mass Effect and Dragon Age have both developed their own Japanese-American animated projects in 2012, Mass Effect: Paragon Lost and Dragon Age: Dawn of the Seeker. Both anime films were made to promote the release or to give clarity to the plot holes of certain videogames as official prequels, particularly for that of Dragon Age: Origins and Mass Effect 3, respectively. Dragon Age would appear in animated form again in 2022 as Dragon Age: Absolution, where unlike Dawn of the Seeker, the series is not an actual anime, nor was it made in Japan. However, it was produced by Red Dog Culture House, a South Korean animation studio, and the series does thematically resemble anime in many ways, particularly through the animation, character design, and fight scenes. Chronologically, Absolution is established to take place after the conclusion of Dragon Age: Inquisition, as characters make reference to events in that game, but before the events of the upcoming video game Dragon Age: Dreadwolf.


Ingress: The Animation is an animated television series based on Niantic's augmented reality mobile game of the same name. An example of a computer-generated anime, the series began airing first in Japan on Fuji TV's +Ultra programming block in October 2018, and then was released globally on Netflix on April 30, 2019. It is also an example of a Japanese-American project that was directly based on a Western video game.


Dragon's Dogma is an animated series  based on the 2012 video game of the same name by Capcom. The series was directed by Shinya Sugai, and was mainly released via Netflix on September 17, 2020. The series is animated by Sublimation. The original game series composer Tadayoshi Makino serves as the show's composer. The series consists of seven episodes, each notably named after the Seven Deadly Sins.


While the closest thing the Tomb Raider series has to animation, especially anime based, is a short-lived anthology series, Revisioned: Tomb Raider, it is not until 2024 that an actual animated series, that of Tomb Raider: The Legend of Lara Croft would be produced and animated by Powerhouse Animation Studios, a studio of which was already notable for having made other anime-inspired works such as Castlevania, Seis Manos, Blood of Zeus, Masters of the Universe: Revelation, Skull Island, and Castlevania: Nocturne.


Ark: The Animated Series, based on the video game Ark: Survival Evolved, is an American anime-styled television series that premiered on Paramount+ on March 21, 2024. The series is notable for having been produced by actors who have voiced roles in the game, such as Vin Diesel and David Tennant, who also stars in the series. The creators of the Ark: Survival Evolved video game, Jeremy Stieglitz and Jesse Rapczak, are the series creators, while Marguerite Bennett and Kendall Deacon Davis are the series writers. Jay Oliva directed the series, which consisted of 14 thirty-minute episodes that develop the game's world further. In an interview with Paste set in early April 2024, Stieglitz said that hand-drawn animation ages better that they made the series 2D so it was not visually confused with the video games and didn't use the same game models, and said that writers Marguerite Bennett and Kendall Deacon Davis ensured that the series was driven by characters than only action, adding that Bennett made, among other aspects, "the character of Helena feel completely authentic", describing her as an "academically trained historian", noting he was a history buff that that cultural consultants were brought in during the episodes "about indigenous cultures...with some of the plot aspects with the flashbacks of those cultures...and the language as well".


Other heavily anime-inspired American-made shows that were based from popular videogames are the Netflix series Castlevania, created by Warren Ellis, its sequel Castlevania: Nocturne, created by Clive Bradley, Dota: Dragon's Blood, created by Ashley Edward Miller, Arcane, created by Christian Linke and Alex Yee, and Splinter Cell: Deathwatch, created by Derek Kolstad and based on the works from Tom Clancy.


Brazil

Since the 2000s there have already been countless independent projects for animated series inspired by anime. One of the first attempts was an animated adaptation of the popular manga-styled comic Holy Avenger after its completion in 2003, however due to financial and production problems the series was never developed. Over the years several other attempts for independent projects for animation inspired by Brazil were created, the most notable being Dogmons!, XDragoon and Magma.


In 2021 an independent platform for anime-inspired animations titled Anistage was created.
In 2025 an animated adaptation of the webcomic Rei de Lata was announced for 2027 produced by the independent animation studio Kimera Estúdio.


Among the anime-inspired Brazilian animated series that premiered on TV are Os Under-Undergrounds that debuted in May 2016, Nickelodeon and Turma da Mônica Jovem, based on the manga-styled comic created by Mauricio de Sousa, that debuted on November 7, 2019.


Chile

Animated series such as Golpea Duro Hara, a show which was an inspiration of the Japanese series such as Dragon Ball and One-Punch Man, was released in 2018. The second season was released in 2020 on Cartoon Network.


In 2020, the Chilean-Brazilian animated film, Nahuel and the Magic Book, was created and inspired by the works of Hayao Miyazaki's projects such as Future Boy Conan and the entire Studio Ghibli with the mixtures of other American animated series such as Steven Universe and Gravity Falls based on its characters. It became the first Latin American feature to win the Tokyo Anime Award for Award of Excellence a year later.


Other countries in the Americas

In 2007, the Canadian anime-style animated short Flutter became the first work from a non-Asian nation to win the Open Entries Grand Prize at the Tokyo Anime Awards.


The Australian independent web series The Amazing Digital Circus and Murder Drones, both produced by Glitch Productions, are entirely Western-styled CGI cartoons in terms of animation, art, and visual design, but there are also plentiful anime elements that can be seen within both series, particularly from the character designs, facial expressions, reaction shots, fluidity of animation, and action sequences.


Europe

France

Highlander: The Animated Series is a 1994 cartoon series based on the British-American Highlander franchise. Despite being confused as an anime due to the series's visual style, it is actually a French animated series. It is a loose spin-off and sequel of the 1986 film of the same name and depicts some of the characters from that film. The series was notably the first animated production of Gaumont Télévision (later Gaumont Multimédia), and later Xilam, with the worldwide distribution rights owned by Bohbot Entertainment (later BKN International).


The French-American international co-production W.I.T.C.H., a magical girl series, has been noted as having an anime-influenced visual style. First season director Marc Gordon-Bates cited anime such as Neon Genesis Evangelion as design inspiration. The animated series is based on Italian comics of the same name themselves drawn in line with manga conventions, as opposed to the more rounded style traditionally used by publisher and co-producer Disney. Co-executive producer Olivier Dumont noted that the high-quality animation was intended to be true to the detailed artwork of the comics series.


The producers of the French anime Code Lyoko, one of the most successful works of European anime, explicitly stated in their introductory document that they were: "Influenced by the poetry and the visual impact of Japanese animation, the series proposes a graphic universe that's particularly original and strong."


The French-Canadian-American Fantastic Four: World's Greatest Heroes series was heavily stylized by Japanese anime; however, the series was never produced in Japan. Instead, it was co-produced by American company Marvel Entertainment and French company MoonScoop Group, with the participation of M6 and Cartoon Network Europe and is distributed by Taffy Entertainment.


The animation and style in Miraculous: Tales of Ladybug & Cat Noir is practically influenced by various Magical girl anime. Toei Animation does some of the modeling for the series, and was originally going to be in an anime-esque art-style. Thomas Astruc, the creator of the show, stated that the production team switched to CGI instead because Ladybug's spots were hard to animate around that time.


Another example of example of an animation that is repeatedly defined as “anime” can be seen in Wakfu: The Animated Series, a flash animation series based on a video game of the same title, and Captain Laserhawk: A Blood Dragon Remix, a Netflix series inspired by the 2013 video game Far Cry 3: Blood Dragon and amalgamates elements and characters from several other Ubisoft franchises, despite both series having been made in France and America.


Blue Eye Samurai is frequently mistaken to be an actual Japanese anime due to its setting being in the Edo period of Japan, as well as its animation being heavily influenced and stylized to appear as a typical anime would, such as Japanese depictions and references and the action sequences. However, it is actually a French-American co-production, and was animated by the studio Blue Spirit, a French company. The creators expressly wanted the series to "look like a moving painting" with character design drawn from bunraku puppets. Inspiration was taken from the character Zatoichi, the "Man with No Name", and the works of Akira Kurosawa.


Spain

In 2018, Movistar+ released Virtual Hero, a Spanish animated series created by YouTube personality El Rubius. It was dubbed as the "first anime in Spanish history". The Netflix original "The Idhun Chronicles", based on The Idhún's Memories book saga written by Laura Gallego, premiered in 2021, also featuring an anime-style animation.


Other European countries

Some French, Italian and Canadian co-produced series have also been influenced by anime, such as Totally Spies!, Martin Mystery, and Team Galaxy.


The visual style of the Italian animated series Winx Club is a mixture of European and Japanese elements, and also very similar to magical girl subgenre.


Asia

East Asia

The animated movies The Adventures of Jinbao and Ratchet and Clank, despite them ostensibly being American-based, were both made in Hong Kong and China. While The Adventures of Jinbao is heavily influenced by anime to the point where several anime websites outright list it as such, it was actually made in China, and therefore is an example of a donghua. Meanwhile, Ratchet and Clank also indeed has both anime aesthetics and references all throughout the film, but the animation itself is made to be more in line with the games rather than actual Japanese animation.


China

Donghua stands for Chinese animation. Most Chinese animated series are produced in 3D such as Douluo Dalu (Soul Land), others like The Kings Avatar have gained global recognition in an emerging industry as more and more Manhuas are being adapted.


South Korea

YooHoo & Friends is an anime inspired 2009 series produced by Aurora World, but it is primarily animated by nSac Entertainment, which is based in South Korea.


Ark is an American-South Korean anime-based movie that predominantly features many archetypes taken from Final Fantasy-style Japanese console RPGs; it is the spiritual successor to Elysium (2003) which takes place in the same universe as the film.


MetaJets is a South Korean-Canadian animated television series produced by Cookie Jar Entertainment and Sunwoo Entertainment. It was displayed in stations like Teletoon, KBS1, TF1, and Cartoon Network.


Kipo and the Age of Wonderbeasts is an American-South Korean anime-styled Netflix series based from Radford Sechrist's 2015 webcomic Kipo. The animated series is produced by American company DreamWorks Animation Television in partnership with South Korean animation studio Mir. In terms of inspiration for the plot, Sechrist compared the series to The Wizard of Oz, "but instead of ruby slippers  has Converse on". The series is notable for referencing the Dragon Ball franchise multiple times, with some characters even having their own “super saiyan” forms.


Middle East

The Emirati-Filipino produced TV series called Torkaizer is dubbed as the "Middle East's First Anime Show", inspired from Japanese mecha media franchise Gundam, and is currently in production, which is currently looking for funding.


Southeast Asia

The 2015 Indonesian animated movie, November 10th is also a kind of anime-influenced animated movie. There's also some other examples of Indonesian anime-influenced animated movie can be found on YouTube and some streaming websites.


In June 2021, the Singaporean anime-influenced TV series, Trese was released on Netflix. It is an adaptation of the Filipino komik series of the same name produced by Southeast Asian BASE Entertainment.


South Asia

Pakistan

A Pakistani hand-drawn romantic anime film called The Glassworker was produced. It is directed by Usman Riaz. The trailer of the film was released in October 2016. The film was released in 2024 as described by the animation studio's website. It is also Pakistan's and South Asia's first crowd funded movie as it had raised $116,000 on Kickstarter. The reason for this high raise was due to Usman Riaz being a famous musician, speaker. The movie is hand drawn so the scenes of the movie gives it a Studio Ghibli vibe.


India

In India, Karmachakra was produced as one of the first Indian anime influenced animations under Studio Durga.


Co-productions with Japan

Occasionally, animated series are developed as outright international co-productions between Japan and one or more other countries, as opposed to having stylistic influence. One of the first major examples of this is the World Masterpiece Theater, an anthology series which specifically depicts animated adaptations based off of famous novels from other countries, all of which were produced by Nippon Animation and developed on Fuji Television and its affiliates. It aired from 1969 to 1997 with a revival on BS Fuji from 2007 to 2009. The anthology series often depicts different classical books or stories including A Dog of Flanders, Marco, 3000 Leagues in Search for Mother, Rascal the Raccoon, The Story of Perrine, Anne of Green Gables, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, The Swiss Family Robinson: Flone of the Mysterious Island, Lucy-May of the Southern Rainbow, Story of the Alps: My Annette, Katri, Girl of the Meadows, Princess Sarah, The Story of Pollyanna, Girl of Love, Tales of Little Women, Little Prince Cedie, The Adventures of Peter Pan, My Daddy Long Legs, Trapp Family Story, The Bush Baby, Little Women II: Jo's Boys (Tale of Young Grass: Nan and Miss Jo), Romeo's Blue Skies, Famous Dog Lassie, Remi, Nobody's Girl, Les Misérables: Little Girl Cosette, The Long Journey of Porphy, and finally Hello Anne: Before Green Gables. The only series that are not included into the World Masterpiece Theater franchise, but is still aired by Fuji Television and treated as if it is part of the franchise are Dororo/Dororo and Hyakkimaru, Moomin, Andersen Stories, New Moomin, Fables of the Green Forest, and Heidi, Girl of the Alps. In the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, there were Japanese-European productions such as Zoom the White Dolphin, Vicky the Viking, Ulysses 31, The Mysterious Cities of Gold, Dogtanian and the Three Muskehounds, Sherlock Hound, Treasure Island, Maya the Honey Bee, Soccer Fever, Ramayana: The Legend of Prince Rama, Montana Jones, and Reporter Blues. During the same period, the Italian studio Mondo TV co-produced separate animated series with Japanese companies, including The Jungle Book, Robin Hood, The Legend of Snow White, The Legend of Zorro and Cinderella.


More recent examples of Canadian and French co-productions include Cybersix (1999), Pecola (2001), as well as Oban Star-Racers and Spider Riders, both from 2006. Ōban Star-Racers is particularly known as one of the European animations that strongly resemble anime. While the majority of the creative directors and writers were French, the production team moved to Tokyo to collaborate with a Japanese production team. Other examples of Canadian-Japanese co-productions include Pac-Man and the Ghostly Adventures, Bakugan, Tenkai Knights, and Scott Pilgrim Takes Off.


While not as common or prevalent as opposed to Western or Eastern animation being produced and released globally, there are notable examples of combining elements of aeni and anime, animation made from Japan and South Korea respectively, into a single animation project. Examples of Japanese-Korean collaborations being done on several animated projects include Element Hunters and Secret of Cerulean Sand, both made in the 2000s. At the same time, the combination of elements from anime and donghua, animation made from Japan and China respectively, into a single animation project is more common by comparison, especially with Chinese animation becoming more and more common as it is becoming increasingly globally distributed across multiple regions in recent years. Examples of Japanese-Chinese collaborations being done on several animated projects include The Tibetan Dog (2011), Bloodivores (2016), Last Hope (2018), TO BE HERO (2016–2018), To Be Hero X (2025), Cheating Craft (2016), and Romance of the Three Kingdoms (2009–2010).


American comic book artist, animator, and television producer LeSean Thomas, who had worked on several anime-influenced projects through varying roles such as being the creative producer and supervising director on Black Dynamite, the storyboard and animation production artist on The Legend of Korra, and as the supervising character designer and series co-director on The Boondocks, is notable for creating two original projects which he conceived, developed, and chief directed in-house at notable Japanese anime studios in Tokyo, both of which were released and is available on Netflix: Cannon Busters (2019) and Yasuke (2021). Both series were co-produced by Japanese animation studios Satelight, MAPPA, and Yumeta Company. LeSean Thomas started a crowdfunding drive in 2014 through Kickstarter for an animated adaptation of Cannon Busters, based on a comic book of the same name that he created, directed and executive produced in-house at Satelight in Tokyo, but the pilot was never posted online for unknown reasons. The Satelight pilot was picked up for a full series at Netflix, also produced at Satelight. Before production of the Netflix series was finished, Thomas began development of a second animated series with MAPPA based on Yasuke. According to Thomas, unwilling to create a standard biopic, he made the series heavily influenced and inspired by other figures in Japanese history, such as Yagyū Jūbei Mitsuyoshi. Instead of a traditional historical animated series, Yasuke was developed as a reimagined take of feudal Japan set in a world of science fiction and fantasy elements, such as magic and mecha, to set it apart from other jidaigeki anime.


Batman Ninja (2018) and its 2025 sequel Batman Ninja vs. Yakuza League are the second and third official Japanese animated adaptations of Batman, next to Gotham Knight; however Ninja and Ninja vs. Yakuza League both stand as actual anime depictions of Batman, as opposed to the Gotham Knight's anime-based anthology format and the frequent influencing and aesthetic inspirations of anime being used on many Western cartoons depicting the character, like The Animated Series, The Batman, The Brave and the Bold, Beware, and Beyond. Both films were directed by Junpei Mizusaki, produced by Warner Bros., and animated by Kamikaze Douga and YamatoWorks, while the character design was done by Takashi Okazaki, who is famous for being the creator of Afro Samurai. The first film's plot involves Batman and his Bat-Family being flung through time and end up stranded in feudal Japan while battling Gorilla Grodd. While there, Batman learns of Japanese history and practices the art of ninja to compensate for his technology failing. The first film also depicts medieval Japanese versions of many of Batman's established rogues gallery, who have each taken on the roles of daimyos warring against each other. The second film's plot involves an invasion of yakuza on Gotham City, masterminded by Ra's al Ghul, and is set literally the next day after the events of the first film. It also depicts the first anime portrayal of the Justice League, but the team is modified to have a more Japanese origin and appearance and are referred to as the titular Yakuza League.


Witchblade and Super Crooks, from Icon Comics and Top Cow Productions, are both adapted from two separate American comic book series of the same name; Witchblade is loosely based on the film and television series; Super Crooks is a spinoff of Jupiter's Legacy. The Witchblade comic book series was influenced by the magical girls and ecchi genres, which are utilized throughout the animation, whereas the Super Crooks comic book series and the resulting animated series is often compared to that of My Hero Academia. Witchblade was released on April 6, 2006, and Super Crooks was released in Netflix on November 25, 2021. Both animated series were animated by Japanese studios Gonzo and Bones. Both are also examples of Japanese-American coproductions, and are both specific examples of adaptations made from American comic books, with Witchblade  in particular being more closely made into a Japanese work.


Numerous Japanese anime series were created based on the Moomin books by the Finnish author Tove Jansson, some of them were even results of collaborations with Japan and the Netherlands, such as Mūmin (Moomin, 1969–70), Mūmin (Moomin, 1972), Tanoshii Mūmin Ikka: Mūmindani no Suisei (Comet in Moominland, 1992), a Dutch-Japanese-produced film, Tanoshii Mūmin Ikka (Moomin, 1990–91), which was a Dutch-Finnish-Japanese-produced TV series, and Tanoshii Mūmin Ikka: Bōken Nikki (Delightful Moomin Family: Adventure Diary, 1991–92), which was a Dutch-Japanese-produced traditional anime TV series.


IGPX and FLCL are two separate American-Japanese projects produced through the collaborations of Production I.G, Cartoon Network, and Adult Swim, respectively. Both anime series consist of original video animations and seasons that have their own distinctive names as part of the English translations. FLCL, in particular, has all its seasons renamed in English as part of its anthology format:  Progressive, Alternative, Grunge and Shoegaze.


Saban's Adventures of Pinocchio (1972) is a Japanese animated series consisting of 52 episodes by Tatsunoko Production. It first aired on Fuji Television in 1972, which was edited by Saban in 1990. The story is loosely based on the 1883 novel The Adventures of Pinocchio by Italian author Carlo Collodi, and heavily contrasts the lighter, more cheerful tones of most adaptations such as Walt Disney's film adaptation and Nippon Animation's version Piccolino no Bōken, by following the darker themes mentioned by Collodi's novel and making the titular character much more flawed and capable of malice.


Laura, the Prairie Girl (1975-1976) is a Japanese animated series based on the novels Little House in the Big Woods and Little House on the Prairie by American author Laura Ingalls Wilder, as well as the 1974-1983 American television series Little House on the Prairie.


The Last Unicorn (1982) is an American-Japanese film based from a script by Peter S. Beagle adapted from his 1968 novel of the same title. It was produced by ITC Entertainment and Rankin/Bass Productions, which was responsible for producing anime-based projects like The King Kong Show, The Smokey Bear Show, The Hobbit and The Return of the King; the animation was done by Japanese studio Topcraft.


Galaxy High School (1986) is an American-Japanese science fiction animated series that premiered on CBS and ran for 13 episodes. It was first aired and dubbed in English, and was then given a Japanese dub to follow. The series was animated, distributed and owned by TMS Entertainment. TMS produced Galaxy High as an attempt to create a similar series to one of their previous anime projects, that of Urusei Yatsura, which was released in 1981 and based on a 1978 manga developed for the American market. Notably, while Urusei Yatsura involves an alien girl attending a human high school, the plot in Galaxy High is reversed to be based around humans attending a high school for aliens.


Ultraman: The Adventure Begins (1987) is an American-Japanese animated superhero film that was jointly produced by Hanna-Barbera Productions and Tsuburaya Productions and animated by both Studio Sign and Ashi Productions. The film was intended to not only introduce the Ultraman media franchise to American audiences but also serve as a pilot for a potential series, but the plan was canceled due to poor critical reception.


Alfred J. Kwak (1989–1992) is a Spanish-Dutch-German-Japanese cartoon based on the original one-man theatre show of the same name made by Herman van Veen. The series was broadcast internationally, and was produced by Telecable Benelux B.V., VARA, ZDF, Televisión Española, and TV Tokyo, and was animated by Telescreen Japan, and first shown in 1989. It consists of 52 episodes. The series’ characters were designed by Harald Siepermann.


The Adventures of T-Rex (1992) is an American-Japanese-French animated series that was a coproduction between Gunther-Wahl Productions, C&D (Créativité et Développement), and  well-known anime producers Kitty Film and Madhouse, Inc., and its plot depicts five musical Tyrannosaurus brothers who acts as a vaudeville group and a superhero team. The series was short-lived and lasted only one season.


Anne no Nikki (1995) is a Japanese animated film based on Anne Frank's 1942–1944 book The Diary of a Young Girl. It was animated by Madhouse, and was directed by Akinori Nagaoka. The film was officially released in Japanese theaters on August 19, 1995. The English version was later officially released for free on YouTube on May 3, 2020.


The Big O (1999–2003) has its second season co-produced by Cartoon Network and Sunrise, and from there the series was released on Adult Swim.


Bubblegum Crisis Tokyo 2040 (1998), a sequel series of Bubblegum Crisis, is primarily a Japanese project, but it has also been developed and produced through the collaborations of AIC and ADV Films.


Baby Felix (2000) is a Japanese animated series aimed for kids that depicts both the adult and infant versions of Felix the Cat as well as various infant versions of the other characters from Joe Oriolo's Felix television program from the 1950s. It was launched by Oriolo's son, Don Oriolo, who also voices the adult Felix, and was also developed by JBC Educational, NEC Interchannel, AEON Studios of Japan and SMEC Media & Entertainment of Taiwan. The show consists of 26 half-hour episodes.


Howl's Moving Castle (2004) is a Japanese film written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki, based on the 1986 British novel of the same name made by Diana Wynne Jones. The film was produced by Toshio Suzuki, animated by Studio Ghibli, and distributed by Toho. Despite following much of the source material, the film differs significantly in the
primary theme from the novel; while the novel focuses on challenging class and gender norms, the film focuses on love, personal loyalty, and the destructive effects of war.


Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple (2004-2005) is a Japanese anime series developed by public broadcaster NHK and consists of 39 episodes. The series notably adapted several Agatha Christie stories about Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple, with the most notable inclusion being the original characters Maybelle West, Miss Marple's great-niece, who becomes Poirot's junior assistant, and her pet duck, Oliver, both of whom are used to connect the two detectives. The TV series is a generally faithful adaptation of the original stories given the time constraints (typically one 25-minute episode for a short story, four episodes for a novel). Despite being a modern Japanese adaptation, the original (mainly English) locations and time period are retained. The anime was produced by Oriental Light and Magic for NHK. The series was directed by Naohito Takahashi with music by Toshiyuki Watanabe and character designs by Sayuri Ichiishi.


Tales from Earthsea (2006) is a Japanese-American animated film co-written and directed by Gorō Miyazaki, and is also animated by Studio Ghibli for the Nippon Television Network, Dentsu, Hakuhodo DY Media Partners, Buena Vista Home Entertainment, Mitsubishi and Toho, and distributed by the latter company. The film was based on a combination of plot and character elements from the first four American books of Ursula K. Le Guin's Earthsea series (A Wizard of Earthsea, The Tombs of Atuan, The Farthest Shore, and Tehanu), as well as Hayao Miyazaki's graphic novel Shuna's Journey; its English title is taken from the collection of short stories of the same name that was published in 2001.


Afro Samurai (2007) and its 2009 sequel Afro Samurai: Resurrection are both Japanese animated projects based on the dōjinshi manga series of the same name written and illustrated by manga artist Takashi Okazaki. After they were created, a producer from the Japanese animation studio, Gonzo, developed an animated miniseries based on the manga, and when the studio released a trailer, Samuel L. Jackson, who would soon voice the titular character, began a five-episode "creative collaboration" with Okazaki and Gonzo, as well as Wu-Tang Clan member RZA, who served as a music composer. Then in 2006, when Funimation (later Crunchyroll, LLC) acquired the rights to the anime series which would premiere on Spike. The Afro Samurai series would debut on January 4, 2007. The sequel television film also aired on Spike TV on January 25, 2009. On May 3, 2007, the series premiered on Japanese television, in English with Japanese subtitles, and for the first time completely uncut.


Deltora Quest is a Japanese-Australian anime television series based on the series of children's books of the same name created by Australian author Emily Rodda. It was announced by Rodda herself at Sydney's Book Council of Australia Conference and at an ABC Kids convention. The series was produced by Genco and SKY Perfect Well Think. The series was first broadcast for 65 episodes on TV Aichi from January 2007 to March 2008, then aired on Cartoon Network Australia and New Zealand in May 2010. Later, it premiered in the United States on The Hub on October 10, 2010.


Highlander: The Search for Vengeance (2007) is an American-Japanese-Hong Kong anime film based on the British-American Highlander franchise of movies and television shows. The film was produced through a collaboration with Imagi Animation Studios, Madhouse, and franchise creator Davis-Panzer Productions. The script was written by David Abramowitz who had previously served as a head writer on Highlander: The Series.


Stitch! is the Japanese anime spin-off of Disney's Lilo & Stitch franchise and the successor to Lilo & Stitch: The Series. It debuted in Japan in October 2008. The first show features a Japanese girl named Yuna in place of Lilo, and is set on a fictional island in the Ryukyus off the shore of Okinawa instead of Hawaii. Its popularity resulted in multiple anime specials, all of which have been marketed in America as part of the series as separate seasons. The Lilo and Stitch franchise evidently became so popular in Asian countries, in addition to Japan, that it created yet another spin-off, a donghua in the form of Stitch & Ai, which debuted in China on March 27, 2017, and has a similar plot. The second show features a Chinese girl named Wang Ai Ling in place of Yuna and Lilo and is set in Huangshan, Anhui. Victor Cook, who directed both seasons of Lilo & Stitch: The Series, personally visited China to assist making the eighth episode of the Chinese series.


First Squad: The Moment of Truth (2009) is a Russian-Japanese coproduction that was made by Japan's Studio 4°C and Russia's Molot Entertainment. On June 8, 2010, Anchor Bay Entertainment released the film in the United States through Manga Entertainment and L.A. based XYZ Films.


The Secret World of Arrietty (2010) is a Japanese animated film directed by Hiromasa Yonebayashi, and is also animated by Studio Ghibli for the Nippon Television Network, Dentsu, Hakuhodo DY Media Partners, Walt Disney Japan, Mitsubishi, Toho, and Wild Bunch. The film’s plot was based on the 1952 novel The Borrowers by English children's books author Mary Norton. In terms of incorporating Japanese content into the film, a notable study made by scholar Robert Hyland situates the film within debates regarding globalization and cultural hybridity. The film was noted as negotiating between European source material and Japanese cultural traditions, resulting in what sociologist Koichi Iwabuchi deemed “cultural deodorization”, a masking of Japanese culture for global markets. However, Hyland argues that rather than being stateless (mukokuseki), the film reflects the tensions between local identity and global exchange. Elements such as Aunt Sadako’s Western-style kitchen or the lavish doll’s house evoke European consumer culture and colonial values of separation, contrasting with the Borrowers’ Shinto-like domestic harmony. At the same time, the film integrates Japanese cultural specificity. Visually, the film employs both Impressionist-inspired techniques (blurred garden scenes reminiscent of Monet) and hyperrealist detail in close-ups of plants and insects, blending Western and Japanese aesthetic idioms.


Marvel Anime (Iron Man, Wolverine, X-Men, and Blade), Iron Man: Rise of Technovore, Avengers Confidential: Black Widow and Punisher, Marvel Disk Wars: The Avengers, and Marvel Future Avengers were all Japanese animated projects based on the Marvel Comics franchise created by Stan Lee, Steve Ditko, and Jack Kirby among others, and their animation services were produced by Japanese studios Madhouse and Toei. Preceding the Marvel Anime franchise is Kyoufu Densetsu Kaiki! Frankenstein and Dracula: Sovereign of the Damned, both made in the 1980s; they were also animated by Toei and are based off of both titular character’s respective Marvel depictions and their original depictions.


Supernatural: The Anime Series (2011) is a Japanese direct-to-video anime miniseries based on the American television series of the same name made by Eric Kripke, and covers the first two seasons. The series was animated by Madhouse. Supernatural stands as one of the few American-based live-action television programs of any kind to have ever been adapted into Japanese animation, as well as the first.


Magic Tree House (2011) is a Japanese animated fantasy film based on the American children's book series of the same name by Mary Pope Osborne. The film is directed by Hiroshi Nishikiori, and the film's screenplay was particularly adapted from the Japanese version of the novel series Magic Tree House by Ichiro Okouchi. It is the only film adaptation of the fantasy series, animated or otherwise, although a live-action Hollywood production has also been announced but has not yet materialized.


Monsuno (2012–2014) is a Japanese-American anime series directed by Yoshiaki Okumura and distributed and produced by FremantleMedia, Dentsu Entertainment USA (part of Dentsu Aegis Network), Jakks Pacific, and The Topps Company. Larx Entertainment animated the series. The series premiered in the United States on February 23, 2012, on Nickelodeon's sister channel, Nicktoons and began airing on TV Tokyo in Japan in October 2012.


The Ninja Hattori-kun anime series has an Indian-Japanese remake of the series of the same name made in 1981; it was produced by Shin-Ei and the Indian animation firms Reliance MediaWorks and later Green Gold Animations which aired on TV Asahi and Animax. It aired from May 13, 2013, to February 16, 2015. The announcement to make the Ninja Hattori-kun remake was part of a marketing ploy to produce several remakes of popular anime television series to be broadcast across television stations in the Asian market to counteract Japan's stagnating domestic anime marketplace due to its declining birthrate.


Monster High: Kowa Ike Girls (2014) is a Japanese web animated miniseries consisting of 8 episodes, and is based on the Monster High franchise made by toy designer Garrett Sander and launched by Mattel. The series was animated at Picona Creative Studio, and was broadcast as a part of TXN's morning children's television programming block Oha Suta, before being currently released on Mattel's Japanese YouTube channel. Next to the Transformers franchise, Monster High stands as one of the few American-based toy line franchises of any kind to have ever been adapted into Japanese animation.


When Marnie Was There (2014) is a Japanese film co-written and directed by Hiromasa Yonebayashi, and was again produced by Studio Ghibli and distributed by Toho. The film is based on the 1967 British novel of the same name made by Joan G. Robinson. It is also notable for depicting various places and environments that actually exist in Japan, such as the Kushiro wetlands in Hokkaido, the Burnham Overy Staithe Windmill in Norfolk, and  Karuizawa, Nagano.


Pingu in the City (2017-2019) is a Japanese anime television series co-produced by American company Mattel Creations (who acquired HIT Entertainment in 2011) and Japanese companies NHK, NHK Enterprises, and Polygon Pictures, with animation produced by DandeLion Animation Studios in the same style as the original stop-motion series through computer-animation. It is a spin-off and a continuation of the Swiss-British stop-motion television series Pingu. The series was distributed across the world by Sony Creative Products, the Japanese license holders for the Pingu franchise. It was directed by Naomi Iwata and written by both Kimiko Ueno and Shigenori Tanabe, with music by Ken Arai.


The French-Japanese film Mutafukaz (2017) is an anime based on the comic series and the short film of the same name. The film was developed through a co-production between Ankama Animations and Studio 4°C and is directed by Shōjirō Nishimi and Guillaume "Run" Renard.


Another French-Japanese co-production, Radiant (2018), is an anime television series based on the manfra of the same name. The 21-episode anime series aired on NHK Educational TV and is based on volumes 1 through 4 of the comic book. It was directed by Seiji Kishi and Daisei Fukuoka, and written by Makoto Uezu, with the animation done in RETAS software by Nerima-based studio Lerche. It was also simulcast by Crunchyroll, with Funimation producing an English dub as it aired.


A Japanese-Filipino produced anime television series Barangay 143 is currently airing on GMA Network.


Altered Carbon: Resleeved (2020) is a Japanese anime film based on the British novel and the subsequent American television series of the same name made by Richard K. Morgan and Laeta Kalogridis, respectively. The film is meant to be a prequel to the show, and covers events that occurres before the first season began. Altered Carbon is the second known American-based live-action television program of any kind to have ever been adapted into Japanese animation.


In April 2020, a studio named Manga Production from Saudi Arabia announced the release of The Journey and Future's Folktales, co-produced with Toei.


Cyberpunk: Edgerunners (2022) is a Polish-Japanese animated miniseries that is adapted from the Polish video game of the same name, made by CD Projekt, and the American tabletop science fiction role-playing game of the same name, made by Mike Pondsmith and R. Talsorian Games. The series was animated by Studio Trigger and was released on Netflix on September 13, 2022. The anime serves as a prequel to the game and takes place about a year before the events of the Cyberpunk 2077 game.


Tom and Jerry Gokko premiered in 2022 on Cartoon Network in Japan as the first Japanese production based on the eponymous American cartoon franchise of the same name. The animation was done by Fanworks in co-operation with Studio Nanahoshi. The series first aired on November 11, 2022, which also coincided with Cartoon Network's celebration of Cheese Day, an event organized by the cheese industry in Japan.


Suicide Squad Isekai (2024) is the first DC Comics animated project to be a full-fledged anime television series, and not done in an anthology short film format like with Batman: Gotham Knight. The anime series depicts the titular team being deployed into a kingdom filled with mythical creatures and magic by Amanda Waller, director of A.R.G.U.S.. The team spends the whole series trying to meet their mission deadline before Waller activates the bombs she placed inside each of them.


Controversy and debate regarding the true definition of anime

The advent of Japanese anime stylizations appearing in Western animation questioned the established meaning of "anime". Defining anime as style has been contentious amongst critics and fans, with John Oppliger stating, "The insistence on referring to original American art as "anime" or "manga" robs the work of its cultural identity."


On the other hand, series like Avatar: The Last Airbender, its sequel and Voltron: Legendary Defender have opened up more debates on whether these works should be called "anime", and whether the culturally abstract approach to the word's meaning may open up the possibility of anime produced in countries other than Japan. While some Westerners strictly view anime as a Japanese animation product, some scholars suggest defining anime as specifically or quintessentially Japanese may be related to a new form of orientalism with some fans and critics arguing that the term should be defined as a "style" rather than as a national product, which leaves open the possibility of anime being produced in other countries.


Animation such as Oban Star-Racers and Code Lyoko, like Avatar: The Last Airbender, are examples over which some critics and fans debate about the term anime and whether it is defined as a "style" rather than as a national product, which leaves open the possibility of anime being produced in other countries.


One of the key points that differentiated anime from a handful of Western cartoons is the potential for visceral content. Once the expectation that the aspects of visual intrigue or animation are just for children is put aside, the audience can realize that themes involving violence, suffering, sexuality, pain, and death can all be storytelling elements utilized in anime just as much as other media projects.


Satire and parody involving anime

At the same time, as anime itself became increasingly popular in America, its styling has been inevitably the subject of both satire and serious creative productions. South Park's "Chinpokomon" and "Good Times with Weapons" episodes, Futurama's episode "Reincarnation", Eureka's episode "Do You See What I See", Blue Sky Studios’s Horton Hears a Who!, Adult Swim's Perfect Hair Forever and Aqua Teen Hunger Force, Comedy Central's Drawn Together and its associated film, Nickelodeon's Kappa Mikey, and Cartoon Network's The Amazing World of Gumball are a few notable examples of Western satirical depictions of Japanese culture and anime. However, sometimes, anime tropes have even been satirized inside its own medium, with such examples including Gintama, KonoSuba, Ouran High School Host Club, Ghost Stories, Panty and Stocking with Garterbelt and Pop Team Epic.


In advertising

7-Eleven developed an anime-styled commercial through the collaboration with The Answer Studio, in relation to its ubiquity in Japan.


The American fast-food Taco Bell advertisement Fry Force has many anime-style features, particularly from Japanese mecha anime Gundam. It is shown in many scenes, as Gundam fighting styles have been used. At the same time, McDonald's had also created its own anime-styled advertisement, WcDonald's, created through the collaborations of Studio Pierrot.


The Odyssey Interactive Omega Strikers action sport video game has a heavy anime influence on its launching advertisement video because it was made by the Japanese animation studio Trigger. The commercial was made specifically in celebration of the premiere launch of its video game.


The Bulgarian juice company Florina had anime-style mascots of the juice flavours named Flo Force, advertised in many youth activities.


Pepsi was featured in commercials and advertisements in the Tiger and Bunny universe, with one particular character, Blue Rose, being frequently depicted as referencing or sponsoring the company in various ways. The commercials started off as a meta depiction within the anime series, but the popularity of Blue Rose resulted in these commercials becoming used as actual advertisements in reality for the titular soda company.


As part of an advertising campaign for the fourth and final season for the Attack on Titan anime series, an animated commercial was made to sell Snickers bars that were specifically designed to promote the series for a limited time. The commercial depicts the main characters fighting against the titular Titans using giant Snickers bars.


Dragon Ball Z has been referenced in multiple advertisements, including one sponsored by Ford Motor Company, with the particular advertisement named Dragon Car Z, and another sponsored by KFC.


Fanta sponsored a commercial depicted in the One Piece universe where the characters Monkey D. Luffy and Tony Tony Chopper start rapping about the soda drink. This led to eight specific designs being made on the soda bottles that were then marketed and sold in stores for a limited time.


Windows 7 developed its own advertisement, “Nanami Madobe's Windows 7 Build-It-Yourself PC Commercial!!", which primarily features Japan's titular Windows 7 mascot character, voiced by Nana Mizuki. The commercial's popularity led to it being sold on DVD.


In response to the widespread popularity of Kit Kats throughout Japan, an anime-styled commercial was made based on the candy bars to increase its marketing value.


In music

The music video for the Linkin Park song “Breaking the Habit” was animated by Gonzo; it was also directed by Joe Hahn and co-produced by Eric Calderon, and uses an anime stylization which was supervised by Kazuto Nakazawa, who had previously directed the animated segment of Quentin Tarantino's Kill Bill: Volume 1 among other things. The video was shot of the band performing the song and was later rotoscoped. A similar situation happened with a music video for the band Dream Theater, for their song “Forsaken.” Also animated by Gonzo, the animated music video was directed by Yasufumi Soejima, and was also rotoscoped in a similar style as with “Breaking the Habit.”


Pharrell Williams released a music video for the 2014 song It Girl; the animation was directed by Mr. and Fantasista Utamaro and was released on September 30, 2014. Produced by Japanese designer Takashi Murakami in his company Kaikai Kiki with Animation Production NAZ, the anime-inspired clip features Williams rendered in the style of various Japanese cartoons and video games.


The Weeknd released an animated music video for his 2020 song “Snowchild”; it was directed by D'Art Shtajio studio and is set after the events of the "Until I Bleed Out" music video. It was described by journalists as "A Dark Trip Down Memory Lane", as it showcases Tesfaye's different looks and the general atmosphere of his music throughout the six main stages of his career. The whole music video was deliberately done in the Japanese animation style of anime.


Matthew Sweet released a live-action/animated music video based off of his “Girlfriend” album. It featured clips from the anime film Space Adventure Cobra: The Movie, mainly featuring the character Jane Royal. The video for another one of the album's singles, "I've Been Waiting", used clips of the Urusei Yatsura character Lum.


Interstella 5555, a French-Japanese anime film, is a unique case in which it is technically a whole feature-length film as opposed to a single music video, but it features songs throughout the entire film instead of dialogue, and features the Daft Punk songs “One More Time", "Digital Love" and "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger".


“Shelter” is a result of the collaboration between by American DJ and record producer Porter Robinson, French DJ and record producer Madeon, and Japanese studio A-1 Pictures. The video was released on October 18, 2016, on Robinson's YouTube channel in partnership with Crunchyroll. Robinson originally approached A-1 Pictures to make the video because it was the studio that created Anohana, an anime series that matches his creative style. Based on an original story written by Robinson, the video is produced in a short film format. The video was broadcast on Toonami on December 31, 2016, making it their first in Japanese with English subtitles as opposed to with an English dub. However, the video is heavily edited in the broadcast, as the subtitled parts were removed.


“Sound and Fury” is the fourth studio album by American singer-songwriter Sturgill Simpson, and was first released through Elektra Records on September 27, 2019. In addition the album being released, a companion dystopian anime film, titled Sturgill Simpson Presents SOUND & FURY, was based off of the album and was written and produced by Simpson and Japanese director Junpei Mizusaki of the animation studio Kamikaze Douga, which was famous for also producing
Batman Ninja (2018) and Batman Ninja vs. Yakuza League (2025).


Britney Spears released an animated music video based off of her song “Break the Ice”, which was the third and final single from her fifth studio album, Blackout (2007). The music video, directed by Robert Hales, released on March 12, 2008, is based on the superheroine character of Spears's "Toxic" video, and portrays her destroying a highly secured laboratory with several clones, including one of herself. It was created with an anime-influenced animation style and was produced by a South Korean animation studio called "Studio Animal". Hong Seong-gun, an animator who participated in the production, included his son's name ("홍치우" and "CHIWOO"), which can be seen throughout the video.


Billie Eilish released an animated music video based off of her song, “You Should See Me in a Crown”, which was directed and animated by Takashi Murakami, with whom she had previously collaborated for the cover of Garage Magazine, on Apple Music, before posting it to YouTube in 2019. Murakami stated in a press release that the anime-style video, which was animated using motion capture technology, took eight months for him to create. The video opens with an animated version of Eilish, dressed in different clothes, most notably a black spider hoodie, and eventually morphs into a spider-like monster that wreaks havoc on a miniature city. The video also notably features the first appearance of the "Blohsh", Eilish's signature logo, as well as Murakami's flowers.


Kanye West released an animated music video based off of his song, “Good Morning”, which was part of his third studio album Graduation (2007). Though not released as a single, an animated music video was produced for "Good Morning". The video was produced by Japanese animation studio OLM and directed by Japanese contemporary artist Takashi Murakami, who had designed the album artwork of Graduation and the cover art for the album's singles. The surrealistic visuals of the video take influences from Japanese anime and utilises cel-shaded animation. The collaboration first came about when West visited Murakami's Kaikai Kiki Co. studio in Roppongi Hills during a brief trip to Tokyo, Japan in the midst of touring the year prior. Often called "the Warhol of Japan," Murakami's surrealistic visual art is notably characterized by cartoonish creatures which appear friendly and cheerful at first glance, but possess dark, twisted undertones. The three-dimensional art technique blends artistry with Japanese anime, with the technicolor album artwork that Murakami designed for Graduation being brought to life through the use of cel-shaded animation. Its narrative also contains numerous visual and thematic references to the sci-fi film Back to the Future. The video was produced by Murakami's production and artist-management company Kaikai Kiki Co., Ltd. in conjunction with Oriental Light and Magic. The latter Japanese studio was responsible for the 3D animation of the Pokémon film franchise as well as the 2001 feature-length anime film, Inuyasha the Movie: Affections Touching Across Time. Meanwhile, the storyline of the music video was written by West, who is a fan of anime himself. An edited version of the video was first displayed in an F.Y.E. commercial used for the promotion of Graduation days before the album's release date. A clip of the animated music video was later leaked onto the Internet on November 12, 2007.


"Addict" is an animated music video released on July 17, 2020, on Vivienne Medrano's YouTube channel, based on and featuring the Silva Hound song of the same name. It is depicted in the Hazbin Hotel cartoon universe, itself already a notably anime-based example.



Atheism, in the broadest sense, is an absence of belief in the existence of deities. Less broadly, atheism is a rejection of the belief that any deities exist. In an even narrower sense, atheism is specifically the position that there are no deities. Atheism is contrasted with theism, which is the belief that at least one deity exists.


Historically, evidence of atheistic viewpoints can be traced back to classical antiquity and early Indian philosophy. In the Western world, atheism declined after Christianity gained prominence. The 16th century and the Age of Enlightenment marked the resurgence of atheistic thought in Europe. Atheism achieved a significant position worldwide in the 20th century. Estimates of those who have an absence of belief in a god range from 500 million to 1.1 billion people. Atheist organizations have defended the autonomy of science, freedom of thought, secularism, and secular ethics.


Arguments for atheism range from philosophical to scientific to social approaches. Rationales for not believing in deities include the lack of evidence, the problem of evil, the argument from inconsistent revelations, the rejection of concepts that cannot be falsified, and the argument from nonbelief. Nonbelievers contend that atheism is a more parsimonious position than theism and that everyone is born without beliefs in deities; therefore, they argue that the burden of proof lies not on the atheist to disprove the existence of gods but on the theist to provide a rationale for theism.


Definition

Writers disagree on how best to define and classify atheism, contesting what supernatural entities are considered gods, whether atheism is a philosophical position or merely the absence of one, and whether it requires a conscious, explicit rejection; however, the norm is to define atheism in terms of an explicit stance against theism. Atheism has been regarded as compatible with agnosticism, but has also been contrasted with it.


Implicit vs. explicit

Some of the ambiguity involved in defining atheism arises from the definitions of words like deity and god. The variety of wildly different conceptions of God and deities leads to differing ideas regarding atheism's applicability. The ancient Romans accused Christians of being atheists for not worshiping the pagan deities. Gradually, this view fell into disfavor as theism came to be understood as encompassing belief in any divinity. With respect to the range of phenomena being rejected, atheism may counter anything from the existence of a deity to the existence of any spiritual, supernatural, or transcendental concepts.
Definitions of atheism also vary in the degree of consideration a person must put to the idea of gods to be considered an atheist. Atheism has been defined as the absence of belief that any deities exist. This broad definition would include newborns and other people who have not been exposed to theistic ideas. As far back as 1772, Baron d'Holbach said that "All children are born Atheists; they have no idea of God." Similarly, George H. Smith suggested that: "The man who is unacquainted with theism is an atheist because he does not believe in a god. This category would also include the child with the conceptual capacity to grasp the issues involved, but who is still unaware of those issues. The fact that this child does not believe in god qualifies him as an atheist."


Implicit atheism is "the absence of theistic belief without a conscious rejection of it" and explicit atheism is the conscious rejection of belief. It is usual to define atheism in terms of an explicit stance against theism. For the purposes of his paper on "philosophical atheism", Ernest Nagel contested including the mere absence of theistic belief as a type of atheism. Graham Oppy classifies as innocents those who never considered the question because they lack any understanding of what a god is, for example one-month-old babies.


Negative vs. positive

Philosophers such as Antony Flew and Michael Martin have contrasted positive (strong/hard) atheism with negative (weak/soft) atheism. Positive atheism is the explicit affirmation that gods do not exist. Negative atheism includes all other forms of non-theism. According to this categorization, anyone who is not a theist is either a negative or a positive atheist. Michael Martin, for example, asserts that agnosticism entails negative atheism. Agnostic atheism encompasses both atheism and agnosticism. However, many agnostics see their view as distinct from atheism.


According to atheists' arguments, unproven religious propositions deserve as much disbelief as all other unproven propositions. Atheist criticism of agnosticism says that the unprovability of a god's existence does not imply an equal probability of either possibility. Australian philosopher J.J.C. Smart argues that "sometimes a person who is really an atheist may describe herself, even passionately, as an agnostic because of unreasonable generalized philosophical skepticism which would preclude us from saying that we know anything whatever, except perhaps the truths of mathematics and formal logic." Consequently, some atheist authors, such as Richard Dawkins, prefer distinguishing theist, agnostic, and atheist positions along a spectrum of theistic probability—the likelihood that each assigns to the statement "God exists".


Before the 18th century, the existence of God was so accepted in the Western world that even the possibility of true atheism was questioned. This is called theistic innatism—the notion that all people believe in God from birth; within this view was the connotation that atheists are in denial. Some atheists have challenged the need for the term "atheism". In his book Letter to a Christian Nation, Sam Harris wrote:


In fact, "atheism" is a term that should not even exist. No one ever needs to identify himself as a "non-astrologer" or a "non-alchemist". We do not have words for people who doubt that Elvis is still alive or that aliens have traversed the galaxy only to molest ranchers and their cattle. Atheism is nothing more than the noises reasonable people make in the presence of unjustified religious beliefs.

Etymology

In early ancient Greek, the adjective átheos (ἄθεος, from the privative ἀ- + θεός "god") meant "godless". It was first used as a term of censure roughly meaning "ungodly" or "impious". In the 5th century BCE, the word began to indicate more deliberate and active godlessness in the sense of "severing relations with the gods" or "denying the gods". The term ἀσεβής (asebēs) then came to be applied against those who impiously denied or disrespected the local gods, even if they believed in other gods. Modern translations of classical texts sometimes render átheos as "atheistic". As an abstract noun, there was also ἀθεότης (atheotēs), "atheism". Cicero transliterated the Greek word into the Latin átheos. The term found frequent use in the debate between early Christians and Hellenists, with each side attributing it, in the pejorative sense, to the other.


The term atheist (from the French athée), in the sense of "one who ... denies the existence of God or gods", predates atheism in English, being first found as early as 1566, and again in 1571. Atheist as a label of practical godlessness was used at least as early as 1577. The term atheism was derived from the French athéisme, and appears in English about 1587.


Atheism was first used to describe a self-avowed belief in late 18th-century Europe, specifically denoting disbelief in the monotheistic Abrahamic god. In the 20th century, globalization contributed to the expansion of the term to refer to disbelief in all deities, though it remains common in Western society to describe atheism as "disbelief in God".


Arguments

Epistemological arguments

Skepticism, based on the ideas of David Hume, asserts that certainty about anything is impossible, so one can never know for sure whether or not a god exists. Hume, however, held that such unobservable metaphysical concepts should be rejected as "sophistry and illusion".


Michael Martin argues that atheism is a justified and rational true belief, but offers no extended epistemological justification because current theories are in a state of controversy. Martin instead argues for "mid-level principles of justification that are in accord with our ordinary and scientific rational practice."


Other arguments for atheism that can be classified as epistemological or ontological, assert the meaninglessness or unintelligibility of basic terms such as "God" and statements such as "God is all-powerful." Theological noncognitivism holds that the statement "God exists" does not express a proposition, but is nonsensical or cognitively meaningless. It has been argued both ways as to whether such individuals can be classified into some form of atheism or agnosticism. Philosophers A. J. Ayer and Theodore M. Drange reject both categories, stating that both camps accept "God exists" as a proposition; they instead place noncognitivism in its own category.


Ontological arguments

Most atheists lean toward ontological monism: the belief that there is only one kind of fundamental substance. The philosophical materialism is a view that matter is the fundamental substance in nature. This omits the possibility of a non-material divine being. According to physicalism, only physical entities exist. Philosophies opposed to the materialism or physicalism include idealism, dualism and other forms of monism. Naturalism is also used to describe the view that everything that exists is fundamentally natural, and that there are no supernatural phenomena. According to naturalist view, science can explain the world with physical laws and through natural phenomena. Philosopher Graham Oppy references a PhilPapers survey that says 56.5% of philosophers in academics lean toward physicalism; 49.8% lean toward naturalism.


According to Graham Oppy, direct arguments for atheism aim at showing theism fails on its own terms, while indirect arguments are those inferred from direct arguments in favor of something else that is inconsistent with theism. For example, Oppy says arguing for naturalism is an argument for atheism since naturalism and theism "cannot both be true".: 53  Fiona Ellis describes the "expansive naturalism" of John McDowell, James Griffin, and David Wiggins while also asserting there are things in human experience which cannot be explained in such terms, such as the concept of value, leaving room for theism. Christopher C. Knight asserts a theistic naturalism. Nevertheless, Oppy argues that a strong naturalism favors atheism, though he finds the best direct arguments against theism to be the evidential problem of evil, and arguments concerning the contradictory nature of God were one to exist.: 55–60 


Logical arguments

Some atheists hold the view that the various conceptions of gods, such as the personal god of Christianity, are ascribed logically inconsistent qualities. Such atheists present deductive arguments against the existence of God, which assert the incompatibility between certain traits, such as perfection, creator-status, immutability, omniscience, omnipresence, omnipotence, omnibenevolence, transcendence, personhood (a personal being), non-physicality, justice, and mercy.


Theodicean atheists believe that the world as they experience it cannot be reconciled with the qualities commonly ascribed to God and gods by theologians. They argue that an omniscient, omnipotent, and omnibenevolent God is not compatible with a world where there is evil and suffering, and where divine love is hidden from many people.


Epicurus is credited with first expounding the problem of evil. David Hume in his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion (1779) cited Epicurus in stating the argument as a series of questions: "Is God willing to prevent evil, but not able? Then he is impotent. Is he able, but not willing? Then he is malevolent. Is he both able and willing? Then whence cometh evil? Is he neither able nor willing? Then why call him God?" Similar arguments have been made in Buddhist philosophy. Vasubandhu (4th/5th century) outlined numerous Buddhist arguments against God.


Secular accounts of religion

Philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach
and psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud have argued that God and other religious beliefs are human inventions, created to fulfill various psychological and emotional wants or needs. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, influenced by the work of Feuerbach, argued that belief in God and religion are social functions, used by those in power to oppress the working class. According to Mikhail Bakunin, "the idea of God implies the abdication of human reason and justice; it is the most decisive negation of human liberty, and necessarily ends in the enslavement of mankind, in theory, and practice." He reversed Voltaire's aphorism that if God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him, writing instead that "if God really existed, it would be necessary to abolish him."


Atheism and ethics

Secular ethics

Sociologist Phil Zuckerman analyzed previous social science research on secularity and non-belief and concluded that societal well-being is positively correlated with irreligion. He found that there are much lower concentrations of atheism and secularity in poorer, less developed nations (particularly in Africa and South America) than in the richer industrialized democracies.
His findings relating specifically to atheism in the US were that compared to religious people in the US, "atheists and secular people" are less nationalistic, prejudiced, antisemitic, racist, dogmatic, ethnocentric, closed-minded, and authoritarian, and in US states with the highest percentages of atheists, the murder rate is lower than average. In the most religious states, the murder rate is higher than average.


Joseph Baker and Buster Smith assert that one of the common themes of atheism is that most atheists "typically construe atheism as more moral than religion". One of the most common criticisms of atheism has been to the contrary: that denying the existence of a god either leads to moral relativism and leaves one with no moral or ethical foundation, or renders life meaningless and miserable. Blaise Pascal argued this view in his Pensées. There is also a position claiming that atheists are quick to believe in God in times of crisis, that atheists make deathbed conversions, or that "there are no atheists in foxholes". There have, however, been examples to the contrary, among them examples of literal "atheists in foxholes". There exist normative ethical systems that do not require principles and rules to be given by a deity.


According to Plato's Euthyphro dilemma, the role of the gods in determining right from wrong is either unnecessary or arbitrary. The argument that morality must be derived from God, and cannot exist without a wise creator, has been a persistent feature of political if not so much philosophical debate. Moral precepts such as "murder is wrong" are seen as divine laws, requiring a divine lawmaker and judge. However, many atheists argue that treating morality legalistically involves a false analogy, and that morality does not depend on a lawmaker in the same way that laws do.


Philosophers Susan Neiman and Julian Baggini among others assert that behaving ethically only because of a divine mandate is not true ethical behavior but merely blind obedience. Baggini argues that atheism is a superior basis for ethics, claiming that a moral basis external to religious imperatives is necessary to evaluate the morality of the imperatives themselves—to be able to discern, for example, that "thou shalt steal" is immoral even if one's religion instructs it—and that atheists, therefore, have the advantage of being more inclined to make such evaluations.


Criticism of religion

Some prominent atheists—most recently Christopher Hitchens, Daniel Dennett, Sam Harris, and Richard Dawkins, and following such thinkers as Bertrand Russell, Robert G. Ingersoll, Voltaire, and novelist José Saramago—have criticized religions, citing harmful aspects of religious practices and doctrines.


The 19th-century German political theorist and sociologist Karl Marx called religion "the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people". He goes on to say, "The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness. To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is to call on them to give up a condition that requires illusions. The criticism of religion is, therefore, in embryo, the criticism of that vale of tears of which religion is the halo."


Sam Harris criticizes Western religion's reliance on divine authority as lending itself to authoritarianism and dogmatism. Multiple studies have discovered there to be a correlation between religious fundamentalism and extrinsic religion (when religion is held because it serves ulterior interests) and authoritarianism, dogmatism, and prejudice.


These arguments—combined with historical events that are argued to demonstrate the dangers of religion, such as the Crusades, inquisitions, witch trials, and terrorist attacks—have been used in response to claims of beneficial effects of belief in religion.
Believers counter-argue that some regimes that espouse atheism, such as the Soviet Union, have also been guilty of mass murder. In response to those claims, atheists such as Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins have stated that Stalin's atrocities were influenced not by atheism but by dogmatic ideology, and that while Stalin and Mao happened to be atheists, they did not do their deeds in the name of atheism.


Atheism, religions, and spirituality

People who self-identify as atheists are often assumed to be irreligious, but some sects within major religions reject the existence of a personal, creator deity. It has been said that atheism is not mutually exclusive with respect to some religious and spiritual belief systems, including modern Neopagan movements. In recent years, certain religious denominations have accumulated a number of openly atheistic followers, such as atheistic or humanistic Judaism and Christian atheists. Atheism is accepted as a valid philosophical position within some varieties of Hinduism, Jainism, and Buddhism.


History

Early Indian religions

Ideas that would be recognized today as atheistic are documented in the Vedic period and the classical antiquity. Atheistic schools are found in early Indian thought and have existed from the times of the historical Vedic religion. Among the six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy, Samkhya, the oldest philosophical school of thought does not accept God, and the early Mimamsa also rejected the notion of God.


The thoroughly materialistic and anti-theistic philosophical Chārvāka (or Lokāyata) a school that originated in India around the 6th century BCE is probably the most explicitly atheistic school of philosophy in India, similar to the Greek Cyrenaic school. This branch of Indian philosophy is classified as heterodox due to its rejection of the authority of Vedas and hence is not considered part of the six orthodox schools of Indian philosophy. It is noteworthy as evidence of a materialistic movement in ancient India.


Satischandra Chatterjee and Dhirendramohan Datta explain in An Introduction to Indian Philosophy that our understanding of Chārvāka philosophy is fragmentary, based largely on criticism of the ideas by other schools: "Though materialism in some form or other, has always been present in India, and occasional references are found in the Vedas, the Buddhistic literature, the Epics, as well as in the later philosophical works we do not find any systematic work on materialism, nor any organized school of followers as the other philosophical schools possess. But almost every work of the other schools states, for refutation, the materialistic views. Our knowledge of Indian materialism is chiefly based on these." Other Indian philosophies generally regarded as atheistic include Classical Samkhya and Purva Mimamsa. The rejection of a personal creator, "God", is also seen in Jainism and Buddhism in India.


Classical antiquity

Western atheism has its roots in pre-Socratic Greek philosophy, but atheism in the modern sense was extremely rare in ancient Greece. Pre-Socratic Atomists such as Democritus attempted to explain the world in a purely materialistic way and interpreted religion as a human reaction to natural phenomena, but did not explicitly deny the gods' existence.


Anaxagoras, whom Irenaeus calls "the atheist", was accused of impiety and condemned for stating that "the sun is a type of incandescent stone", an affirmation with which he tried to deny the divinity of the celestial bodies. In the late fifth century BCE, the Greek lyric poet Diagoras of Melos was sentenced to death in Athens under the charge of being a "godless person" (ἄθεος) after he made fun of the Eleusinian Mysteries, but he fled the city to escape punishment. In post-classical antiquity, philosophers such as Cicero and Sextus Empiricus described Diagoras as an "atheist" who categorically denied the existence of the gods, but in modern scholarship Marek Winiarczyk has defended the view that Diagoras was not an atheist in the modern sense, in a view that has proved influential. On the other hand, the verdict has been challenged by Tim Whitmarsh, who argues that Diagoras rejected the gods on the basis of the problem of evil, and this argument was in turn alluded to in Euripides' fragmentary play Bellerophon. A fragment from a lost Attic drama that featured Sisyphus, which has been attributed to both Critias and Euripides, claims that a clever man invented "the fear of the gods" in order to frighten people into behaving morally.


Does then anyone say there are gods in heaven? There are not, there are not, if a man is willing not to give foolish credence to the ancient story. Consider for yourselves, don't form an opinion on the basis of my words!

— Bellerophon denying the existence of the gods, from Euripides' Bellerophon c. 5th century BCE, fr. 286 TrGF 1-5

Protagoras has sometimes been taken to be an atheist, but rather espoused agnostic views, commenting that "Concerning the gods I am unable to discover whether they exist or not, or what they are like in form; for there are many hindrances to knowledge, the obscurity of the subject and the brevity of human life." The Athenian public associated Socrates (c. 470–399 BCE) with the trends in pre-Socratic philosophy towards naturalistic inquiry and the rejection of divine explanations for phenomena. Aristophanes' comic play The Clouds (performed 423 BCE) portrays Socrates as teaching his students that the traditional Greek deities do not exist. Socrates was later tried and executed under the charge of not believing in the gods of the state and instead worshipping foreign gods. Socrates himself vehemently denied the charges of atheism at his trial. From a survey of these 5th-century BCE philosophers, David Sedley has concluded that none of them openly defended radical atheism, but since Classical sources clearly attest to radical atheist ideas Athens probably had an "atheist underground".


Religious skepticism continued into the Hellenistic period, and from this period the most important Greek thinker in the development of atheism was the philosopher Epicurus (c. 300 BCE). Drawing on the ideas of Democritus and the Atomists, he espoused a materialistic philosophy according to which the universe was governed by the laws of chance without the need for divine intervention (see scientific determinism). Although Epicurus still maintained that the gods existed, he believed that they were uninterested in human affairs. The aim of the Epicureans was to attain ataraxia ("peace of mind") and one important way of doing this was by exposing fear of divine wrath as irrational. The Epicureans also denied the existence of an afterlife and the need to fear divine punishment after death.


Euhemerus (c. 300 BCE) published his view that the gods were only the deified rulers and founders of the past. Although not strictly an atheist, Euhemerus was later criticized by Plutarch for having "spread atheism over the whole inhabited earth by obliterating the gods". In the 3rd century BCE, the Hellenistic philosophers Theodorus Cyrenaicus and Strato of Lampsacus were also reputed to deny the existence of the gods. The Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus (c. 200 CE) compiled a large number of ancient arguments against the existence of gods, recommending that one should suspend judgment regarding the matter. His relatively large volume of surviving works had a lasting influence on later philosophers.


The meaning of "atheist" changed over the course of classical antiquity. Early Christians were widely reviled as "atheists" because they did not believe in the existence of the Graeco-Roman deities. During the Roman Empire, Christians were executed for their rejection of the Roman gods in general and the Imperial cult of ancient Rome in


